The Project Gutenberg eBook of Jack Heaton wireless operator
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Jack Heaton wireless operator


Author: A. Frederick Collins

Illustrator: Robert Emmett Owen

Release date: January 26, 2024 [eBook #72796]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1919

Credits: Roger Frank and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net. This file was produced from images made available by the Library of Congress.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK HEATON WIRELESS OPERATOR ***




JACK HEATON, WIRELESS OPERATOR

[Illustration: “‘Boys, you have done your duty. Now save yourselves’”]




JACK HEATON, WIRELESS OPERATOR

BY A. FREDERICK COLLINS

Author of “Inventing for Boys,” “Handicraft for Boys,”
“The Boys’ Book of Submarines,” etc.

WITH EIGHT ILLUSTRATIONS BY R. EMMETT OWEN

NEW YORK

FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

PUBLISHERS




Copyright, 1919, by Frederick A. Stokes Company

Copyright, 1919, by The Sprague Publishing Company

All rights reserved




TO DONALD DELMAR ZEITLER




CONTENTS

    I  How I Learned Wireless
   II  My First Job as an Operator
  III  When the “Andalusian” Went Down
   IV  Catching Seals by Wireless
    V  My Adventures in the Tropics
   VI  Working with Marconi
  VII  A Government Operator at Arlington
 VIII  Aboard a Warship at Vera Cruz
   IX  On a Submarine Chaser
    X  A Signalman on a Submarine
   XI  With the Field Artillery in France
  XII  Mustered Out




ILLUSTRATIONS

  “‘Boys, you have done your duty. Now save yourselves’”

  “‘The _Republic_ is sinking and is sending out C Q D’s’”

  We were catching seals by wireless!

  “‘I whipped out my gun just in time to spot a couple of snipers’”

  “A bright flash of blue fire shot up through the hole”

  Our torpedo passed through the raider’s hull and exploded inside

  “The airplane signaled down to us in code”

  “But for every one the boches sent we put over two or three”




JACK HEATON, WIRELESS OPERATOR

CHAPTER I--HOW I LEARNED WIRELESS

It happened out at sea about five hundred miles as wireless waves fly
from Montclair. But perhaps you don’t know where Montclair is and maybe
you don’t particularly care, but as it is my home town I must tell you
about it. First, it’s in New Jersey a short way from South Orange, where
Mr. Edison, the great inventor, has his laboratory, and about twelve
miles from New York City. So you see it is pretty favorably located.

If you were a stranger going through the place you’d have been surprised
to see the webs of wires strung around every other house in town and on
first sight you might have taken them for telegraph or telephone lines,
or as I once heard a man remark to my father, “They look like lines on
which to hang the family wash.” But, nay, nay, these wires, on the
contrary, were not used for any such commonplace purpose but they were,
instead, _aerials_ put up by wireless boys for sending and receiving
messages.

Just about half of the fellows in our town at that time were wireless
bugs and they ranged anywhere from thirteen to nineteen years of age,
though every once in a while a full fledged man would be found with an
outfit. Some of the fellows had elaborate equipments with aerials
containing upwards of a thousand feet of wire and with them they could
send messages to distances of a hundred miles or so and receive them
from powerful stations a thousand miles away.

I don’t know who started the wireless game in Montclair, but I do know
that it was a long time after I was exposed to the wireless germ that it
_took_ and I was interested enough to _listen in_ to the news that was
flashed out by ship and shore stations. Nearly all fellows begin
wireless by seeing some of their pals monkeying with the apparatus, and
no wonder, for wireless has a kind of fascination about it that makes a
deep appeal to not only boys but men.

At that time I was fifteen years old and my hobby was printing. I had
quite an outfit, including a 5 x 7 self-inking press, a good layout of
type, cases and everything. As I was a boy of action and wanted quick
results I couldn’t see this idea at all of constantly adjusting a
_detector_, working the slider of a _tuning coil_ back and forth,
looking as solemn as an owl and keeping as silent as a clam.

There was a friend of mine named Bob Carteret who had the top floor of
the garage on his place and he had one of the best amateur outfits in
town. A lot of us fellows used to make his operating room a _hang-out_
because we could get into and out of it without disturbing any one or
getting called down by anybody. Bob was a mighty good sport even if he
did wear spectacles and talk like a college professor and he was always
willing to let a fellow listen in if he could read Morse, while for the
benefit of those like myself who didn’t know the code he would tell us
what the fellows in our own neighborhood were saying or what the
operators down in Virginia, over in Ohio, up in New York State, or out
in the Atlantic were sending.

It was interesting enough to pick bits of news right out of the air, so
to speak, and I noticed that the grown-up folks were always mighty keen
to hear any wireless news that might happen to come Bob’s way. In those
good old days when amateur wireless was young any fellow could set up
his own station, use whatever _wavelength_ he wanted to send with, and
blab any news that chanced to come his way; but all this was changed a
few years later when the government found that too many amateurs were
abusing these privileges. To give them a chance it made every one who
operated or owned a wireless station register it, gave him a call
letter, limited the sending range of his apparatus, had him use waves of
a certain length for sending, and made it an offense for him to give out
any news which he might receive. And oh, the wail that went up all over
the United States from the amateurs!

I went over to Bob’s one evening after dinner--we always have dinner in
the evening in Montclair--and as usual there was Bob sitting at his
table listening in. Charlie Langdon, Howard Brice and Johnny James were
there and they were all leaning over him looking worried.

“Hello, fellows,” I sang out as I opened the door.

“Shut up,” hissed Howard, while Johnny punched me in the ribs with his
elbow and Charlie showed his butter teeth and flapped his open hand,
which in kid language means _keep still_.

I sat down sulkily, for no self-respecting boy that can box the way I
used to wants to be told to shut up, get a poke in the ribs and the
signal to keep his face closed when he has only said, “Hello, fellows.”
After a minute or two my curiosity bristled up for I must needs know
what was going on. I looked at Bob. His face was a little longer than
usual, his eyes were glassy and stared hard and he kept adjusting the
detector nervously.

“What’s it all about, Howard?” I whispered in his ear.

Say, you’d think I’d committed a crime the way he scowled at me. Then he
deigned to make a whispered reply.

“The _Republic_ is sinking and is sending out C Q D’s.”

I could feel my heart stop beating, the blood leave my head, and my body
get rigid, and it’s just about the same kind of a feeling that comes
over a fellow when he is on a ship that is going down, as I have since
learned.

Other ships were answering the _Republic’s_ distress signals and were
headed for her but they were a long, long way off and it seemed very
doubtful if they could reach her in time. The _Republic’s_ operator kept
on sending C Q D’s and then her latitude and longitude. I stayed at
Bob’s station until dad came after me, which was about midnight. At
first he was pretty sore, but when he found out what had kept me he
relented a little.

Well, the next day we wireless fellows--I had been initiated--did not
take a very keen interest in our school work, for when you know a big
ship crowded with human freight is sinking you don’t care much whether
school keeps or not. As soon as school was out we were all at it again
and then after fifty-two hours of hoping against hope, and during all of
which time Jack Binns, the first wireless hero, had stuck to his key on
the ill-fated ship, help reached her and by so doing his duty sixteen
hundred lives were saved.

[Illustration: “‘The _Republic_ is sinking and is sending out C Q D’s’”]

Bob took the receivers from his head and laid them on the table. I tell
you we were an excited crowd and it had us going for fair. We all felt
as if we had really something to do with it, instead of merely getting
the news at first hand. It was indeed a thrilling piece of business, and
nothing more was needed for me to get into the wireless game except an
outfit.

Now I don’t know whether you know anything about wireless, but I will
say here that while you can only send over short distances with a good
sized sending apparatus, you can receive over quite long distances with
a cheap receiver if you have a fairly decent aerial, by which I mean one
that is high enough above the ground and has a long enough stretch, and,
of course, it must be properly insulated. Not only this, but a sending
apparatus of any size costs much money and takes a lot of current to
work it. On the other hand a receiving apparatus can be bought for a few
dollars and can be used without any current at all, though it gives
louder signals when a dry cell is used.

Just as soon as my wireless pals found I’d got the _bug_ they all jumped
in and helped me _rig_ up the aerial. We strung it up between a tree at
the back end of our lot and the gable at the side of the house so that
it was about fifteen feet high at one end, thirty feet high at the other
end and fifty feet long--a very respectable aerial.

We ran the _leading in_ wire to the window of my printing office.
Outside the window frame we screwed a _lightning switch_. Next we
fastened the _rat-tail_ of the aerial to one of the middle posts, and
from the other lower post we ran a wire down to the ground and into the
basement, where we clamped it on to the water pipe, and this made the
_ground_. This done we connected the other end of the switch with a wire
and ran it through an insulator in the window sash so that it could be
fixed to the instruments when I got them.

“Won’t those wires attract the lightning, Jack?” my mother asked, eyeing
it dubiously after the aerial was all up.

I was just about to tell her I had never thought of that, when Bob
jumped in and explained it all as intelligently as though he were Sir
Oliver Lodge lecturing on wireless before the Royal Society.

“You see, Mrs. Heaton,” he began, “an aerial when it is properly put up
like this one really protects a house from lightning just as a lightning
rod does, only better. Before a storm the air is charged with
electricity and as the aerial is connected with the ground through that
switch up there, the electricity as fast as it is formed is carried to
the ground and this prevents enough of it from gathering to make a
lightning stroke.”

Mother’s eyes brightened hopefully as she looked on this smart boy.

“Isn’t it wonderful!” she said, and went into the house perfectly
satisfied that I was in good company.

The next move on my part was to get the receiving apparatus. This
consisted of a _detector_, a _tuning coil_, a _dry cell_, a
_potentiometer_, and a pair of _head telephone receivers_ or head-phones
as they are called for short. Bob helped me to make the detector because
he said he could make a better detector than I could buy. When I got
everything ready to _hook up_ I was terribly nervous for I could hardly
wait to try them out.

I had a diagram that Charlie gave me which showed exactly how the
instruments were connected up, and as I wanted to be able to say “I did
it myself,” and without the advice or criticism of any of the fellows, I
started to work on it as soon as I got home. I used my imposing table to
set the apparatus on and it was not long before I had it all wired up as
per the diagram.

Verily I was a proud youth when I put on the head-phone, adjusted the
detector and moved the slider of the tuning coil back and forth. I knew
just how to do it because I had seen the other fellows make these same
adjustments a thousand times.

“I can call spirits from the vasty deep,” boasts Glendower in
Shakespeare’s play of “Henry IV.”

“Why, so can I, or so can any man, but will they come when you do call
for them?” retorts Hotspur.

That just about states my case, for I could adjust the detector and run
the slider back and forth on the tuning coil and so can any one else,
but to be able to get a message is quite another matter. But then
perhaps, as I thought, no one was sending, so I telephoned over to Bob
and asked him to send something and to send it slow. I went back to my
receiver but try as I would I couldn’t get a thing. Gee, but it was
discouraging.

In about fifteen minutes Bob popped in and by this time I was right glad
to see him. He looked over the apparatus, not like an amateur but like a
professional operator, and saw to it that all of the wires were tight.

“You’ve got it connected up all right and we ought to get it. Somebody
ought to be sending something.”

He put on the receiver and listened, but to no purpose. He looked
perplexed. As he was listening and trying to adjust the receiver, he
glanced out of the window.

“You’re a great operator, you are,” he said with a rueful countenance;
“how do you suppose you’re going to get anything when you haven’t got
your lightning switch closed?”

Well, from that day to this when anything goes wrong I always look first
to see if all the switches are closed and the connections are tight.

“Ollie Nichols of South Orange is telling Eddie Powers to meet him at
the Y.M.C.A., and have a swim,” he said with a grin.

Then he clapped the receiver on my head and I heard the signals coming
in as plain as day, only I didn’t know what the fellows who were sending
were talking about.

To make a long, and for me a most pleasant, story short I learned the
_Continental Morse Code_ which was used by all Marconi stations and when
I got so I could read the _kid_ stations in and around Montclair, I
began to branch out and pick up the commercial stations.

In those early days, although it was only ten years ago, the regular
operators didn’t send as fast as they do now and this made it quite easy
to read them. It was not many weeks before I could double discount Bob
on receiving, but he was always a shark on the _theory_ of the thing.
What he didn’t know about electric waves, electric oscillations,
disruptive discharges, tuning open and closed circuits and all the rest
of that deep stuff was, to my way of thinking, not worth knowing. Bob
lived up to his reputation for he graduated from Princeton, got a Ph.D.
degree, became a Captain in the Signal Corps of the Army and is now
somewhere in France.

I was quite well satisfied for a long while just to _listen in_, but
finally the novelty of the thing wore off and I felt that I must needs
send also. My first transmitter was made up of a one-inch spark coil, a
Leyden jar condenser, a tuning coil, a key and a lot of dry cells. As I
was now in possession of a complete station, when the other kid stations
wanted me they used to signal J K H and these remained my call letters
until the government took a hand in wireless. Thus it was I landed at
last fairly and squarely in the amateur class.

My wireless proclivities were getting the better of my scholastic
training and my folks were quite worried over and more than tired of it.
So one sweet day dad and I had a long talk and he did the most of it.

“Wireless,” he said gently but firmly, “is a good horse if you don’t
ride it to death, but that is just what you are doing. There isn’t a
minute of the time you are in the house, when you are not eating or
sleeping, that you haven’t got that pair of receivers glued to your
ears.”

“But, dad, next to Bob, I get the highest marks in physics in my class
and I’m nearly a year younger than he is too. Why I can tell the _prof_
things he doesn’t know about the emission, propagation and reception of
electromagnetic waves,” I enthused, pulling off some of that heavy,
theoretical stuff of Bob’s.

“That is all very well,” he came back, “and I’m glad you can talk so
understandingly, at least to your father, but those big words are not
getting you anywhere in algebra and that’s the point at issue.”

Then suddenly veering the subject he asked, “How far can you send a
message with that coil apparatus there?”

“A couple of miles in daylight if the atmosphere is right and about
twice that far at night if there is not too much interference. You
see--”

“How much would an apparatus cost that had power enough to send say
twenty miles?” he broke in.

“About fifty dollars, I guess,” I made reply.

“Then let’s strike a bargain. It’s two months till school is out and if
you will bend your efforts and pass everything--everything, mind
you--I’ll see to it that you have a sending outfit that’s worth
something.”

“Dad, you’re all right,” I ejaculated, shaking his hand warmly.

“And you’re all right, too, Jack, if you’ll only speed up in your
studies a bit.”

The result was that both dad and I made good. He was pleased with my
work and I was tickled most to death with my new half-kilowatt
transmitter. But that is what you call buying an education for a fellow
twice. It’s a shabby trick to work on one’s folks and I’ve often thought
about it since. The only way I can ease off my conscience is by
considering that this mild kind of bribery has been worked by nearly all
fond parents in one way or another ever since the world began.

Hardly had I installed my new transmitter than summer was upon us and we
were rushing off for our annual vacation at the seashore. Not far from
Asbury Park, where we were to spend the heated months, there was a
Marconi station. I had a brilliant idea and to the end of trying it out,
I made a box about four inches high, six inches wide and twelve inches
long with a good lid to it and fitted it with hinges, clasps and a
handle.

I arranged my receiving apparatus so that it would all go snugly into
the box--that is, I made a portable receiver of it. Then I got a spool
of No. 18 copper wire, three or four porcelain knob insulators, a screw
driver and a pair of pliers, and I was ready for business.

When we were inducted in our hotel, which was to be our home for the
next couple of months, I strung the wire lengthwise across the roof,
supporting it on the insulators. I brought the free end of the wire down
the side of the hotel and into my room which was on the sixth floor. I
connected the aerial wire to one of the binding posts of my portable
receiver and the other binding post to the water pipe in the bath room.
Talk about messages! Why I got them from all over New Jersey when the
big stations were working.

Some one told the manager (I’ll bet it was the elevator boy I had had
the run-in with the first day I rode up with him) and he nearly spoilt
everything, for he made me take the wire down. But I _foxed_ him. I
hooked the aerial end to a brass bed and with this arrangement I could
get a couple of the nearest big stations, but of course not so clear and
loud. Sometimes I could even pick up a coastwise steamer which carried
the _United Wireless Company’s_ apparatus and on two or three occasions
I had the pleasure of listening to a conversation between two
transatlantic liners. I suppose if the manager of the hotel had known
about it, he’d have charged me extra for using the bed as an aerial.

It showed me, though, that there were great possibilities in wireless
and that we may yet be able to talk with the inhabitants of Mars. I
wanted to get into wireless deeper and I did.

CHAPTER II--MY FIRST JOB AS AN OPERATOR

Just before the Christmas holidays my father, who was the New York
manager of the _Singer Crude Oil Engine Company_, told mother and me
that he had to make a business trip to Nicaragua.

There was nothing exciting in this announcement for dad went off on
business trips quite often, but when he said that he would take us with
him and we’d go by steamer I immediately sat up and took notice, for I
had wanted to make a sea voyage ever since I could remember.

It may seem a little queer but although I lived almost within sight of
the old Atlantic and picked up messages right along from coast liners,
the only trip I had ever made was on a little steam launch that takes
unwary pleasure victims from Asbury Park outbound toward Europe for
about ten miles, or until every one’s gizzard is turned wrong-side-out
(much to the delight of the fishes) and back again.

I said _every one_ was sea-sick nigh unto death but as a matter of fact
there were just three human beings aboard the _Snail_ that were able to
step ashore like sober folks and walk a fairly straight line. I don’t
want to do any bragging but these sole survivors of _mal-de-mer_ were
the captain and the engineer, who made up the crew, and yours truly.

To make a real ocean voyage on a sure enough steamer meant something
more to me than just a sea-going trip, for a law had been passed some
time before making it compulsory for all ocean passenger vessels to have
a wireless outfit aboard and I was just _bugs_ to see a regular ship set
in operation.

For the next few days everything around home was a hurry-up place--like
going away for the summer--and I was mighty glad when at last we took
the Erie (not weary) railroad for Jersey City, where the _Pan-American
Line_ had its docks. Once there, a couple of porters relieved us of our
numerous pieces of hand baggage, and trailing along in the rear of dad
and mom, I came aboard feeling like a duke.

After we were shown our staterooms by the steward I made a bee-line for
the wireless room, but found it locked, the operator not yet having put
in an appearance. To kill time till he came I went up on the _hurricane
deck_, that is the upper deck, to take a look at the aerial.

It was formed of a couple of parallel wires about 200 feet long
suspended between the masts and insulated from them by _strain
insulators_ of the kind that was then known as the _Navy type_. I was
standing close to one of the _funnels_ looking up at the aerial, which
seemed to me to be a middling one--I had seen better and worse in
Montclair--when all of a sudden there was a terrific noise set up and
for a second I failed to cohere--that is I was nearly scared stiff. In
an instant my _jigger_ was right again, for it was only the ship’s
whistle blowing its deep throated blast to let those who had come aboard
to say good-by to their friends who were sailing, know that it was time
to go ashore, and to those ashore who wanted to take the boat know that
they had better get a move on them if they expected to make it.

When I got back to the wireless room there was quite a collection of
people crowded around the little window, but whether for the purpose of
sending messages or out of curiosity I didn’t know. I stood about as
much chance of getting up to that window as a fellow has of getting on a
subway express at Brooklyn Bridge during the rush hour.

I went away in disgust and didn’t go back again until we had sailed down
the river, passed through the Narrows and had dropped the pilot out at
sea.

Suddenly I heard the _ze--ze--zip--zip--zippy_ snap of the sparks of the
transmitter as the operator began to send, and I rushed madly to the
wireless room. As I ran down the passageway I read ‒··· ·‒· ‒ that is _B
R T_, _B R T_, _B R T_, at intervals of every two or three minutes; _B R
T_ was the call letter of some shore station that the operator was
trying to get, but without my book, which gave the call letters of the
different ship and shore stations, I couldn’t tell which one it was.

You know, of course, that when a vessel wants to talk to a station
either on ship or shore the first thing the operator does is to
_listen-in_--to make sure that he will not interfere with messages that
are being exchanged between other stations within his range. If the
_ether_ isn’t too busy he then sends the call letter of the station he
wants.

On reaching the wireless room I found a bigger crowd congregated around
the window than ever for the _zip--zippy_ crackle of the sparks as they
broke down the air between the spark-gap _electrodes_ had attracted the
curious even as honey attracts insects of the _Musca domestica_ family,
i.e., houseflies, and I couldn’t get within six feet of it.

There was a short lull while the operator looked over a message which a
little man with red hair and a pepper and salt suit had written out.
When the operator started to send again I read off the name of our ship,
the state of the weather and the number of words he intended to send,
all of which was in accordance with the regular routine prescribed by
the rules and regulations of the company for governing communications by
wireless between ships and shore stations. The message ran like this:

For fear you may not know the Morse code which was used by all coastwise
steamers in those early days, I will do it into English for you.

[Illustration: The Morse Code patterns and the text of a message with
this content: "VINALOS", "FINE", "FIFTEEN", "J D BROWN 12 BROADWAY NY",
"FORGOT MONEY IN HASTE", "SEND TWO HUNDRED DOLLARS BY WIRELESS",
"REST BY DRAFT", "RIALJO", "FRANK BROWN"]

_S G_, which I afterwards looked up, was, I found, a station at Sea Gate
which was on the coast. _Vinalos_ was the name of our ship. _Fine_ meant
the state of the weather. _Fifteen_ indicated the number of words the
message contained.

I laughed at the man who forgot, but nobody else laughed because there
was probably not one among them who knew the difference between a
binding post and an electric wave.

All of that afternoon I read the outgoing messages, but I felt I was
losing something by not getting what was coming in. Then a brilliant
idea struck me and I immediately proceeded to put it into execution with
the result that it almost electrocuted me.

I took out my little portable receiving set, hooked a wire to the
detector and the other end to the electric light fixture for a _ground_
which, from what I had read about ship stations, I had reason to believe
made a connection with the steel hull of the ship. Being so close to the
2 kilowatt (about 2½ horsepower) transmitter, one side of the spark-gap
of which also made connection with the hull, I hadn’t the slightest
doubt but that I could receive without an aerial and I certainly did,
but the kind wasn’t right.

No sooner had I put on my head-phones and my fingers on the adjusting
screw of the detector than zip, zum, bang, boom, and I received a
terrific shock that lifted me clear off the edge of my bunk; I hung
suspended in mid-air ’tween decks (or so it seemed) and to give
verisimilitude to the _levitation_ act, I recoiled like a 12-inch gun
and hit the floor with a dull thud. I was glad the man I laughed at
because he forgot, was not there to laugh at the fellow who didn’t know.

When I had fully come to and was able to use my thinker again I knocked
the wire off of the electric light fixture and then proceeded to examine
my receiver to see if anything had been damaged. Beyond burning off the
point of my detector there was no scathe done, and I overhauled it and
put the instrument back in its box.

My next move was to see the operator and hold some small wireless talk
with him. It was now late in the afternoon and when I got back it
overjoyed me to find that the crowd who hungered to penetrate the
mystery of sending messages without wires had fathomed its very depths
and departed, that is, all except one young couple who were from
Missouri, according to the passenger list, and of course they must needs
be shown.

The moment I saw the operator’s face I set him down for one of those
fresh young fellows you meet everywhere and I did not miss my guess. Now
you would hardly believe it, but it is nevertheless true, that there are
a few operators who think it smart and a great joke to tell land-lubbers
anything but the truth whenever they are questioned about wireless.

“What I can’t understand,” said the young woman, “is how you can send
out a wireless message when the wind is blowing so hard.”

If the operator had been even a 14-carat gentleman he would have told
her that when he works the key a low pressure current of electricity is
broken up into dots and dashes representing letters and that this
intermittent current flowing through the coil of the transmitter is
changed into high frequency oscillations by the spark; the oscillations
then surge through the aerial wire and their energy is emitted from the
aerial in the form of electric waves. These electric waves are exactly
the same as light waves, except that they are very much longer, and both
are transmitted by, in and through the _ether_. Hence the wind, which is
air in motion, has nothing at all to do with it.

This would have been the real scientific explanation of how a message is
sent and while it would, more than likely, have been as clear as mud to
her young inquiring mind, still if she could not grasp the true
explanation of how it works it would have been her misfortune and not
the operator’s fault. See?

But did he tell the lady straight? You could have told from his
_physiog_ that he would not. Instead he went on at great length and
framed up a story of how the wind had once blown a message he had sent
far out of its course and then suddenly veering round it blew it back
again and he caught his own message several minutes later when he was
listening-in for the reply. This he claimed, with great seriousness was
due to the low power of his instruments and a fouled aerial.

“Are you having any trouble now on account of the wind?” continued the
young woman deeply interested.

“None at all, because you see I am using a four horsepower spark and I
have just had my aerial sandpapered and oiled and the waves slip off
without the slightest difficulty.”

This little speech gave me another shock, but I had a third one coming
and forthwith got it.

“How are they coming in?” I asked, leaning against the window after the
couple had gone.

“What do you mean?” he questioned as he looked at me through half closed
eyes in a way I didn’t fancy.

“Why the messages?”

“Through the window,” he returned shortly, and went back to his key.

I stuck around the window and took a good look at the instruments which
to my way of thinking weren’t much, in fact a lot of fellows in
Montclair had outfits that put his way in the shade except that they
were not as powerful. I couldn’t see why he was so _swelled_ on himself.

He began calling again and after he had put through his message I
repeated it out loud as though I was talking to myself, just to let him
know that I knew.

He took off his head-phones, came over to the window and smiled a
thin-lipped smile which was anything but friendly.

“So you’re another one of those wireless kids, eh?”

“Yes, I have a pretty good wireless set. I live in Montclair and very
often I hear Key West,” I told him with some pride.

The way he warmed up to me was something wonderful and in all my
experience as an operator I have never met another of exactly his wave
length.

“You kids,” he said, pointing his long bony finger at my right eye,
“make life a nightmare for us professionals. Every kid that knows how to
splice a wire seems to be crazy to send messages. Ninety-nine out of a
hundred know nothing of wireless and their signals are simply a jumble
of sparks.

“A kid has no business learning wireless at all. I can _tune out_
amateur low power stations, but they are always breaking in in the
middle of a message. I haven’t got any use for a wireless kid. So
_hotfoot_ it and don’t hang around here any more.”

This was too much for even a fellow with a cast-iron nerve like mine, so
I turned on my heel, said _sore-head_ under my breath and took a walk on
the promenade deck. He was the first professional operator I had ever
met and I was certainly disappointed in the way he treated a brother
operator. I wondered then if all professional operators had his kind of
a _grouch_ and if so, I didn’t want to be one of them.

Not to be out-generaled I thought I’d try one more scheme and that was
to use a couple of pieces of wire five or six feet long for the aerial
and ground, hook them on to the detector of my receiver, fix the free
end of the aerial over the window and lay the free end of the ground
wire on the floor. In this way there would be no direct metal connection
between his transmitter and my receiver.

The waves from his set were so powerful that they easily bridged the gap
and I listened-in whenever I wanted to and knew everybody’s business on
board all the way down to Realjo. But I kept away from the wireless room
and that operator. Before we landed I found out from the second officer
that the operator was only a substitute for the regular one and that it
was the second trip he had ever made.

After a stay of a couple of weeks in Realjo we started back for New York
on the _Almirante_. I didn’t know whether to tackle making friends with
the operator or not. I had swallowed a pretty bitter wireless pill on
the way down and didn’t care about repeating the dose.

The second day out I ventured close enough to the instrument room to see
what the outfit looked like and to size up the operator in charge.

He was a big fellow with a full rounded face and every little while he
would whistle a popular air which fitted in nicely with the bright
sunshine that flooded the room. At the same time he would listen-in and
finally he sent O. K., which in the wireless code means that he had
heard the operator of the distant station who was calling him and that
he was ready to take his message.

Of course I couldn’t tell what was coming in but I was aching to put
those head-phones on just once. When he had finished writing out the
message he put it in an envelope and started to leave the room. Spotting
me standing by he beamed pleasantly.

“Oh! I say, boy, I wonder if you would be so kind and condescending as
to take this message to the Captain? Some other messages are likely to
come in and I don’t want to leave my post.”

Would I carry a message to the Captain? Why I’d carry one to the King of
Abyssinia for a pleasant word from any professional operator. I felt
that there was my chance to get a stand-in with his royal highness, the
wireless man.

After delivering the message to the Captain I returned with alacrity to
the window of the wireless room. The operator loosened up but I didn’t
tell him I was one of those fellows too. I had learned at first hand
that professional operators hadn’t any use for wireless kids and that
the only way to be friends with one was to be as dumb as a clam as far
as wireless was concerned.

This scheme worked out fine for after some talk he asked me of his own
accord if I’d like to take a look at the apparatus. He opened the door
and told me to “come right in” although on a card tacked on the wall in
plain sight was printed this legend:

                Service Regulations for Operators.

    (1) The instrument room is strictly private. No strangers are
    allowed on the premises without a signed permit from the
    Managing Director.

And this was followed by a dozen or more other rules and regulations.

When I got inside the room the operator, whose name was Bathwick, began
pointing out which part of the apparatus was the sender and which made
up the receiver; this was the key; that the sending tuning coil, over
here the condenser; under the table the transformer; on the wall the
spark-gap; and altogether these make up the transmitter. This the
crystal detector, the potentiometer, the tuning coil, the variable
condenser and the head-phones make up the receiver and, finally the
aerial switch, or _throwover switch_ as it is called, the purpose of
which is to enable the operator to connect the aerial with the
transmitter or the receiver, depending on whether he wants to send or to
receive.

I acted as if I had never seen a wireless set before; all went well
until he had finished and then I let the cat out of the bag. He had a
peculiar kind of a loose-coupled tuning coil that I had never seen
before and I asked him how it was _wound_. He grinned at me with his big
mouth and blue eyes and put out his open hand, palm side up.

“Put it there, pal,” he said. “I was a wireless kid myself once.” We
shook hands and it put me next to the fact that all professional
operators are not alike and at the same time it gave me a pass to the
wireless room whenever I wanted it. I almost lived there the rest of the
voyage.

Harry--I mean Bathwick--and I got so thick we began calling each other
by our first names. He let me listen-in whenever I wanted to, and then
after telling me all about the service regulations that had to do with
the order in which the messages were sent, he let me try my hand at
sending.

One night when we were off Cape Hatteras and a furious gale was blowing
Harry got suddenly sick and as this is the worst part of the whole trip
the Captain was in a quandary about his wireless messages. Harry told
him that I could work the instruments and to put me in his place. The
Captain seemed doubtful at first because of my age, but there was
nothing else he could do.

Naturally I made a few mistakes but at that I was pretty successful and
I had the distinction, so the Captain told my father, of being the
youngest operator on board ship on record.

Well, the gist of it all was that when I graduated from High School in
the spring and wanted a job as an operator I made application to the
_United Wireless Company_, which at that time controlled about all the
coastwise steamers, and, armed with a letter of recommendation from
Captain Harding of the _Almirante_, I got it on the good ship _Carlos
Madino_.

The year I was the operator on this ship I visited many Central American
ports. I became more and more imbued with the desire to see farther
around the corners of the great round world and I think I can safely say
I have done so in a fairly creditable manner.

CHAPTER III--WHEN THE _ANDALUSIAN_ WENT DOWN

As I have said, I was in the coastwise trade for nearly a year, and
could _savvy_ anything in English or Spanish, Morse or Continental, that
the old-time operators were able to send. I had sent and received
messages of every description and for every conceivable purpose.

Why, once a brother operator and I married a maid who was on board my
ship to a man somewhere in Panama by wireless. Of course there was a
minister at each end to help the ceremony along but it was we operators
who really did it with our wireless sets.

Another time while we were running through a storm it was my pleasant
duty to flash the tidings ashore that a stork had overtaken us and added
two more to our passenger list, both consigned, to use a maritime term,
to the same family.

The most exciting time I had while I was on the _Carlos Madino_ was when
we were taking a cargo of munitions to the Nicaraguan government and
which we had orders to land at “Alvarada,” the headquarters of the Army.

When we were within a day’s run of that port I heard the call _CM CM CM_
which was our ship. I sent my _O. K._, and then got a message for the
Captain which told him to land the cargo at “Grayville” as the
insurgents were watching “Alvarada.” It was signed Strada, Minister of
War, Nicaragua.

I took this important message to the Captain myself and we were soon
headed for “Grayville.” Several other messages passed between the
Captain and the Minister of War and it struck me that the signals were
the strongest I had ever received for the distance covered; in fact they
were strong enough for a 5 kilowatt transmitter instead of a 2 kilowatt
transmitter which I knew was installed at the station at “Alvarada.”

My first thought was that I had struck some highly sensitive spot on my
crystal and I tested it out only to find that wherever I put the wire
point on it the signals came in just as clear and loud. I wondered.
While I am not the seventh son of a son-of-a-gun nor do I claim any
supernatural powers I got the _hunch_ that down here in tropic waters
where insurrections are the rule and not the exception all was not as it
should be.

I told the Captain about it and while he didn’t take much stock in the
idea he had a search made of the ship. One of the room stewards reported
that he had found an electric cord with a plug end hanging from a lamp
socket in room 138. It might have been for an electric iron, for a
hot-water heater or any one of a dozen other electric appliances, he
said, but it looked suspicious.

A more thorough search of room 138, in which the Captain and I took
part, revealed a heavy suit case under the bunk, which had a place to
plug in the cord, another for the receivers, and a key--at least this
was my theory. A strict watch was kept on the stateroom and I went back
and sent _GA_, which was the call for “Alvarada” every few minutes.

In the course of fifteen minutes or so I got the _OK_ of the operator at
_GA_. The steward who had entered the stateroom adjoining the one
occupied by the suspect heard the faintest sounds of sparks coming from
it. After this report I made a careful examination of my aerial and
found that the _leading-in_ wire from it which connected with my _aerial
switch_ had been cut while the end of the wire from my instruments had
been connected to a wire so small it could scarcely be seen and this
wire led to stateroom 138.

After connecting my instruments to the aerial again I immediately got in
touch with the station at “Alvarada” and learned that no orders had been
given by the Minister of War to change our port of destination. The
Captain had the protesting passenger put in irons to be turned over to
the government officials of Nicaragua and thus it was that another small
insurrection was knocked in the head.

I had filed an application with the _Marconi Company of America_ for a
job on one of their transatlantic ships; it was in for nearly three
months and I had long since concluded that it and I were pigeonholed. My
great ambition now was to get a berth on one of the big ships that
crossed the pond. Various operators had told me that it was useless to
try to get in with the _Marconi Company_ because the latter employed
only operators who received their training in the Marconi wireless
schools abroad.

Be that as it may on one of my return trips my father handed me a note
from the Chief Engineer of the _Marconi Company_ to see him. I did so
and the result of that interview gave me the post of Chief Wireless
officer of the s. s. _Andalusian_, one of the largest ships of the _Blue
Star Line_.

Her route was between New York and Liverpool. Built by Harlan and Wolff
of Belfast, Ireland, she was launched in 1901 and fitted for the
transatlantic service in 1902. She was over 600 feet long, her breadth
was nearly 70 feet and her depth was 40 feet. Talk about a ship, boy,
the _Andalusian_ was as far ahead of the _Carlos Madino_ as that ship
was ahead of a lifeboat.

The aerial of the _Andalusian_ was formed of two wires 375 feet long and
suspended between her top-gallant masts 200 feet above the sea and were
held apart by two 8-foot spreaders. She was one of the first ships to be
fitted with wireless and her wireless room was a specially built room on
the port side of the forward saloon deck.

Although the apparatus was of the old Marconi type, having been
installed when the ship was built, we could send from 300 to 400 miles
with it and receive four times that distance. The transmitter was formed
of two 10 inch induction coils the primaries of which were connected in
series and the secondaries in parallel so that while the length of the
spark was still 10 inches it was twice as fat and hence proportionately
more powerful.

There was a _jigger_, as Marconi called his tuning coil, and a battery
of 18 Leyden jars made up the condenser for tuning the sending circuits.
It was also fitted with a new kind of a key invented by Sammis who was
at that time the chief engineer of the _Marconi Company of America_.

He called it a _changeover switch_ but it was really a key and an aerial
switch combined. In order to connect the receiver with the aerial all
you had to do was to turn the key, which was on a pivot, to the right.
When the key was turned it also cut off the current from the transmitter
by breaking the sliding contact between them.

To throw on the transmitter and cut off the receiver you simply turned
the key back to its normal position and this made the connection between
the aerial and tuning coil and at the same time it closed the circuit
connecting the source of current with the induction coils.

The up-to-date feature of this set was the storage battery which
provided an auxiliary source of current so that in the event of the ship
becoming disabled and water flooding the engine room, which would put
the dynamo out of commission, the storage battery in the operating room
could be thrown in and _C Q D_ could be sent out as long as the wireless
room remained above water. This was a mighty good piece of hindsight,
for ships that might otherwise have been saved by wireless had gone down
at sea with passengers, crew and cargo simply because the dynamos were
drowned out.

The receiver was different from the one I used on the _Carlos Madino_
for instead of a _crystal detector_ we had a _magnetic detector_ which
Marconi had recently invented. While the magnetic detector was not
nearly as sensitive as a crystal detector when you found a sensitive
spot on the latter, still there were no adjustments to be constantly
made as with the former.

Now I’ve told you something about the ship and her wireless equipment
and right here I want to introduce Algernon Percy Jeems, Second Wireless
Officer of the _Andalusian_ and my assistant. Perce, as I called him,
looked his name and lived up to it. He was as thoroughbred a gentleman
as ever worked a key.

He wasn’t very big in body--only 5 foot 4--and he was of very frail
build but he proved to be a giant when it came to sheer bravery and as
for meeting death when duty called he was absolutely unafraid. In fact
when he saw the grim old reaper bearing down on him he went out of his
way to grasp him by the hand and said: “When I get through with this
message I’ll be ready to go with you.” And he did!

Before I tell you what happened to the _Andalusian_ and of the heroic
nerve of Jeems, I want you to know what _C Q D_ means and how it came to
be used as a distress signal. It was not until Jack Binns, who stuck to
his key for 52 hours on the ill-fated _Republic_ and by so doing saved
the lives of 1600 passengers and crew on board that _C Q D_ came to be
known the world over as a distress signal.

In the _Continental code_, which is used all over Europe by the wire
telegraph lines, _C Q_ means that every operator on the line shall give
attention to the message which is to follow. It was natural then that
when wireless apparatus began to be installed on ships that the
_Continental code_ should be the one used. _C Q_ was the call signal
employed to mean that every operator was to give attention to the
message to follow, just as in the wire systems, or as it is said on
shipboard to _stand by_.

Then the _Marconi Company_ added the letter _D_ which means danger,
hence _C Q D_ means _stand by danger_ and when this signal is received
by an operator at sea, no matter how important the message that he is
sending or receiving may be, he drops it at once and answers the _C Q D_
signal to find out what the trouble is.

Now to go on with the story: We sailed from Liverpool about noon on the
15th of March for New York with a full passenger list and a valuable
cargo. The first couple of days out the weather was fairly decent but as
usual at this time of the year we ran into a real winter gale. We were
struck time and again by mountainous seas. One gigantic wave that broke
over her bow tore away a part of the bridge, others poured through
ventilators and nearly every time she was hit more damage was done. To
make matters worse the high winds drove us out of our course.

Although a sharp watch was kept it was so dark at night the lookout
couldn’t see his hand an arm’s length before his eyes though he might
have been able to see a ship’s lights ahead had one been bearing down on
us. As the Captain had been on the bridge continuously for three days
and nights I felt it was my duty as the first wireless officer to stick
to my key, and though it was Perce’s watch I told him to turn in.

About midnight I heard the hull scrape against something that sounded as
though she’d struck bottom when crossing a bar, or perhaps it was an
iceberg. She keeled over until I thought she was a goner but straining
and giving in every part of her superstructure she gradually rolled back
and righted herself again.

The saloon and second cabin passengers came tumbling out of their rooms
in nighties and pajamas but what they lacked in clothes they made up in
life preservers. Wherever you find danger there you will find among the
panic-stricken a few cool, calm and collected men and women and sure
enough two or three men and as many women appeared a few minutes later
fully dressed and ready for anything that might happen. The officers
assured all hands that nothing had or could happen and nearly all of
them returned to their rooms.

The third class passengers were locked in the steerage and here
pandemonium reigned. They pounded on the hatchways and demanded that
they be allowed to go on deck; they were scared stiff. Like the other
and more fortunate passengers they were soon quieted by cool headed
stewards and returned to their miserable quarters in the fo’cas’le.

Within the next couple of hours one of the assistant engineers
discovered that the seams of the hull had parted aft and the water was
pouring into her hold. The Captain ordered all the bulkhead doors
closed, to keep the water out of the other compartments, and her great
pumps going, but once started the mighty pressure of the inrushing water
ripped her seams farther along and broadened the gap. Knowing she could
not stay afloat for any great length of time the Captain ordered me to
send out the call for help and to be quick about it.

I got busy with the key sending out _C Q D  C Q D  C Q D_ listening
inbetween the calls as I never listened before to get an _O K_ to my
signals. It seemed as if all the operators were either asleep, dead or
on the other side of the Equator, but after an eternity of time--which
probably amounted to as much as five minutes by the clock--I caught the
signal _O K_ and then, “what’s up, old man.”

It was the s. s. _Arapahoe_ that had answered and I was nearly frantic
with joy for I felt that all of the responsibility for saving those 1200
souls on board rested entirely on me. I sent back the name of our ship,
told him we were fast sinking, gave our latitude and longitude so that
the _Arapahoe_ would know where to find us if by good fortune we were
still afloat when she reached us and, I added “for God’s sake put on all
speed.”

In the meantime all the passengers had been notified, told to dress and
to put on their life preservers while the sailors had been ordered to
man the life-boats. When the passengers came on deck the situation was
calmly explained to them together with the hopeful information that
three steamers were bound for us as fast as steam could carry them for I
had got the _O K_ from two others--the _Morocco_ and the _Carlisle_.

There was, on the whole, very little excitement now among the saloon and
second-class passengers, and, curiously enough, I observed that those
who had been seasick nigh unto death seemed to forget their ailment in
the face of danger and had their sea-legs on well enough to look after
their own safety. It proves, I think, that seasickness is largely a
matter of an exaggerated imagination plus a lack of will power.

Before the hatches were opened to let the steerage passengers out of
their hole and on to the lower deck the Captain and one of his officers
took their places on the main deck forward where they could watch every
move the poor frightened mob made. They came helter-skelter up the
hatchways falling all over themselves and everybody else, but when they
saw the Captain and the officer towering above them each with a brace of
horse-pistols leveled at them like young cannon they eased off a bit
their desire to be saved at the expense of others and the stewards had
no further trouble with them.

Just then Perce got awake and hearing the gruff orders of the officers,
the throbbing of the big pumps and the loud and excited talk of the
passengers, he wanted to know the cause of it.

“The ship is sinking! so get up right away,” I exclaimed as evenly as my
voice would let me and working the key for dear life.

“Oh, she is, is she,” he yawned as if it was an every-day occurrence.
There was no excitability in Perce’s makeup.

Well, sir, we kept her afloat until daylight when the Captain ordered
every one to the life-boats, women and children first.

Perce and I stuck to our instruments, keeping the ether busy and every
now and then sending out cheery bulletins to the passengers, the gist of
them all being that help was almost at hand.

I could feel the ship begin to settle and the life-boats loaded to the
gunwales with their cargo of human freight, were quickly lowered into
the running sea. It required great seamanship to do this and even then
one or two of them were capsized.

The Captain suddenly appeared before our window.

“Boys, you have done your duty. Now save yourselves,” and with that he
was gone.

I could feel her nose pointing up in the air and I knew she was going
down stern-end on. It was only a question of minutes.

“Go on, Perce. I’ll stick here.”

“Go on yourself,” he replied; “if any one stays I will.”

I don’t know exactly what happened but something flying through the air
must have hit me, for the next thing I knew I had struck the icy water
and had gone down several fathoms. The sudden ducking revived me and
when I came up I swam for an overcrowded life-boat. The bos’n pulled me
in and a woman’s voice whispered, “Thank God, he’s saved!”

There on the edge of the horizon I could see the dim outline of a ship
with a great black stream of smoke in her wake and I knew her for the
_Arapahoe_ at last.

“Where’s the little operator?” a man asked me.

The bos’n pointed to the fast sinking ship, the bow end only of which
was out of the water, and said, “There he is, sir!”

And as we looked we saw big brave Captain Stacey and little heroic Perce
with their right hands clasped and with the Captain’s left hand on
Perce’s shoulder, just as two old friends might greet each other on
Broadway or the Strand, who had not met for a long time.

An instant later the great ship sank from sight leaving a momentary
whirlpool, due to the suction of it, in the water.

The _Arapahoe_ reached us an hour later and stood by and considering the
heavy seaway and the wind, which though it had somewhat abated was still
blowing half a gale, picked up the survivors and then proceeded on her
way.

The passengers made a good deal over me and, since I am only human, I
should have enjoyed their worship immensely, but while I had done my
duty I knew it was Perce who was the real hero and I told them so.

CHAPTER IV--CATCHING SEALS BY WIRELESS

What did I do when I got back, did you say? Well, after the sinking of
the _Andalusian_ my folks thought I ought to be willing to give up the
sea and confine my adventures to Montclair, the Lackawanna Railroad and
New York, and they urged me to settle down and sell engines, or get into
some other kind of business in the big town and commute like the rest of
the suburbanites.

I tried it for a few months but the air is dead on land and it stifles
me like poison-gas when I breathe it, and besides, I kept hearing the
call of the sea oftener and oftener and louder and louder just as though
a spook mermaid were holding a conch shell to my ear.

Well, sir, there were just no two ways about it. I was not cut out for a
salesman but I could handle a key with the best of them. So one bright
day--it was the first of March--when dad told me to go out and see a
_prospect_ who wanted a 40 horsepower crude oil engine, I made one stone
kill two sparrows and after fencing with the would-be buyer for half an
hour I slipped over to the _Lord’s Court Building_ where the _Marconi
Company_ had their offices and talked with my friend Sammis, the Chief
Engineer.

“No, there isn’t anything you’d want just now,” he reflected. “There’s a
couple of new ships building in Belfast for the _Cunard Line_ and one of
them will be launched in a couple of months. I might be able to get a
berth for you on her.”

“I want to go right now if I go at all,” I told him, for the land ached
in my bones like the old Harry and I knew the only way I could get
relief was to go to sea.

“How would you like to go on a seal catching expedition to the Arctic?
It ought to be a pretty good health trip for an overworked salesman. The
_Polar Bear_ and _Midnight Sun_ sail in a couple of weeks from St.
Johns, Newfoundland, to be gone for a month or so and the pay is double
that of any operator in the transatlantic service. I have just shipped
an operator named Mackey up there and gave him the post on the _Midnight
Sun_ so you’ll have company, for they will sail together. If you’ll take
it I’ll try to get you a good berth in the meantime.”

“To the Arctic,” I ejaculated. “Well, Sammis, this is a voyage I’ll have
to sleep over, but it sounds good to me. I’ll let you know in the
morning.”

There wasn’t the slightest doubt in my mind but that I’d take it but I
didn’t know exactly what my folks would say about it, for their idea was
that they had had enough of my going to sea and they further thought
that I ought now to be perfectly satisfied to stay on land for the rest
of my natural life.

Do you know that when I stepped out of the _Lord’s Court Building_ after
having signed up the next day I could feel the stone sidewalk rolling
under me like the deck of a ship and that the putrid air of Wall Street
smelled as if it had a dash of sea salt in it. That’s how great I felt.
Dad would have to get some one else to sell his engines--it was the
Arctic for me!

[Illustration: WE WERE CATCHING SEALS BY WIRELESS!]

On arriving at St. Johns I at once hunted up Captain James of the _Polar
Bear_ and handed him my commission. _And such a captain he was!_ He
looked a different race of seafaring men from the captains I had seen in
the regular Atlantic service.

His grizzled hair and beard and clear, keen eyes were gray; that part of
his face which showed was about two shades lighter than the color of
dried walrus meat and with his silence--except when any of the crew
failed in his duties--you would have known, even if you’d met him on
Broadway, that his home was somewhere inside the Arctic Circle. He
turned me over to his first mate who also looked as if he had a heart of
oak and would be equal to any duty he might be called on to perform if
it was north of latitude 75 degrees, the latitude at St. Johns.

_And, oh, the crew!_ They were cutters of the old school, every one of
them. I had no idea that sailors of their kind were to be found anywhere
at this time here on earth except in song and story, but there they
actually were all about me in the living flesh. There was an air about
them that told as plainly as spoken words they had weathered many a
polar storm and that now, even at St. Johns, they were way too far south
of the bleak, frozen regions to be in their element.

_And say, the ship!_ She was a beaut of the old wooden kind, not a whole
lot to look at, but built to stand the strains of furious gales as well
as the tremendous pressures of the ice packs. Indeed, she had been one
of Commander Peary’s ships which had been farthest north when that
explorer sought to find the North Pole some years before.

The wireless apparatus and I were the only objects on the ship that
seemed not to belong to her, but when we reached the sealing grounds we
found ourselves and helped in the catch, thereby making friends with the
Captain and his crew.

The transmitter was formed of a single ten inch induction coil which was
energized by a current of the ship’s dynamo. The receiver was of the
regular Marconi type with a magnetic detector. The masts of the _Polar
Bear_ were only fifty feet apart and an aerial made up of half-a-dozen
wires swung between them.

Whoever installed the equipment stopped at the aerial for there was no
_ground_. It was no small job to get a decent _ground_ for the ship, as
I have said before, was an old-timer and had a wooden hull. Now where a
ship has a steel hull all you’ve got to do to make a _ground_ is to
simply connect the ground wire to a water pipe, or any other metal part
of the ship, for these lead to the steel hull; as the hull sets in the
water the very best kind of a _ground_ is had without any trouble to get
it. But what’s to be done when there’s nothing but an old-fashioned
wooden hull between your instruments and the water? The way I did it was
to run a wire from the instruments down to the engine room; then the
assistant engineer fixed a 6 x 6 x 24 inch block of wood parallel with
and close to the propeller shaft; this done we screwed a copper _brush_,
that is a strip of stiff sheet copper, to the block so that it pressed
flat on and hard against the shaft.

Under the head of one of the screws I looped the free end of my ground
wire and screwed it down tight. This made a good enough ground
connection through the shaft and the propeller keyed to it which was
submerged in the water. With this transmitter, aerial and ground, I
could cover 100 miles or so when the conditions were favorable.

Everything was hustle and bustle on board and all around us, for at that
time of the year--it was nearing the middle of March--a score or more of
ships steam from St. Johns along the great Labrador Coast to the frozen
north where the young _harp seals_ are found by the thousands on the ice
floes off the coast.

Of all the ships at St. Johns I saw only one other that was fitted with
an aerial and when I got my apparatus in order I made my way over to her
to see Mackey, her operator.

In days gone by the sealing ships were all schooners and just as these
gave way to wooden steamers so the latter will be supplanted by ships
with steel hulls, and the _Midnight Sun_ was the first of these fine new
steel craft. For size and power she put it all over the _Polar Bear_,
but she lacked the glamor of romance and for this reason I liked my ship
the best.

I had met Mackey, her operator, at Liverpool once and we straightway
became better acquainted. He told me that the firm who owned the _Polar
Bear_ also owned the _Midnight Sun_ and that the Captains of them were
to work together. A new experiment was to be tried, he said, and that
was to catch seals by wireless, but what the _modus operandi_ of the
scheme was he hadn’t the faintest idea and no more had I. I remember
when I was a little boy that folks talked about running street cars by
electricity and I wondered how it could be done. I had a kind of a vague
notion that a chunk of electricity came along, struck the car and pushed
it ahead just as a breeze fills the sails of a ship and carries her
for’ard.

In after years I learned that the current of electricity flowed along a
wire parallel with the tracks and that it passed from this feeder to the
trolley of a car, thence down a conductor to a motor which it energized
and finally back to the power house through the rails; further that it
was the power of the motor thus developed which drove the wheels of the
car; and I was disappointed, for it seemed to me to be altogether too
round-about a way--too far-fetched--to justify the statement that the
“car runs by electricity.”

The same thing holds good when you see signs which read, “_hats cleaned
by electricity_,” “_eggs hatched by electricity_,” and “_diamonds made
by electricity_,” for the hat is merely rotated by an electric motor,
the eggs are hatched in an incubator which is heated by a current
flowing through a wire, and the diamonds are made in an electric
furnace.

Now catching seals by wireless was to my mind quite a vague, mysterious
and altogether a difficult proposition to see into--even as running a
car by electricity was when I was a little shaver. Seals are wonderful
creatures, as you will admit if you ever saw them do a balancing act in
a show, and I have heard that they have a great liking for music. A seal
hunter can take a phonograph, put a band record on it, set it up where
there is a patch of seals and start it going. The seals will come out of
the water to listen to the sweet strains and every time one puts its
nose above the surface the hunter, who is lying a little way off, will
shoot it with his rifle. This then is what you might call _hunting seals
with music_.

It looked to me as if we might be told to send out a line of wireless
waves to a patch of seals, bend up the ends of a few dashes and when the
seals had swallowed them the sailors would heave ho and pull them
aboard. But no, catching seals by wireless was not done in quite so
direct a fashion, as you will presently see.

We only made one stop after we left St. Johns and that was at
Cartwright, near the mouth of the Hamilton River, on the bleak coast of
Labrador. And wireless, let me say right here, has been a big factor in
changing life, such as it is, in this wild, forbidding country.

Labrador, you know, is a narrow strip of coastland along the edge of the
province of Quebec. It is from 10 to 50 miles wide, but a thousand miles
long, reaching from Belle Isle Strait which separates the lower end of
it from Newfoundland to Hudson Strait which lies within the Arctic
Circle.

The inhabitants live only on the coast and these are made up chiefly of
Eskimos in the north and Indians in the south, and all along and in
between are trappers, fishermen and _live yeres_. The trappers push into
the interior a little way to run their lines of traps and in the spring
of the year thousands of fishermen come up from Newfoundland to take the
cod-fish, which abound off the coast at this season of the year. If you
ask one of the poor, ignorant white inhabitants about himself he will
say that he _lives yere_, hence the nick-name of this fixed part of the
population. The condition of all these poor, simple folk has been much
improved by wireless.

For many years the mail-boat was the only steamer that made calls at all
the ports along the coast and she did this about every six months. If
any one wanted to get something from St. Johns he had to know it a long
way ahead of time and even when he was thoughtful enough to order it the
chances are that by the time it reached him he had forgotten he had
ordered it or had gotten over wanting it.

On the mail-boat there was a doctor and the inhabitants had to wait to
get sick until he came, or perhaps, it would be stating the case a
little more accurately to say that however ill they might be they had to
wait until he came before they could be treated. Anything might and
often did happen to his patients between calls. But all this has been
changed by wireless which now links up the towns along the coast with
Battle Harbor where the _Royal Deep Sea Mission_ has its hospital for
fishermen, and not only may supplies be ordered but, what is of far
greater importance, the sick may have their diseases diagnosed and
medicine prescribed though they are as far away as Maine, by the doctor
in charge and all in the twinkling of an electric wave.

As we steamed up the coast the ice fields began to loom up and as far as
the eye could reach they glittered and sparkled like gigantic jewels
under the glare of the Arctic sun. When night came on and the stars came
out they shone a hundred fold brighter than in the temperate zone and
the pale blue moon illuminated the scene with a kind of a supernatural
light that seemed not to belong to earth.

But all the days and nights were by no means fine ones, for howling
gales and fierce snow storms continually sprang up and I often wondered
how a ship built and sailed by the hands of men, could weather them out.
It was a man’s work! On such occasions I stuck to my wireless room which
I found mighty comfortable and trusted to the Captain and his mates to
see the ship safely through.

As we got farther and farther north the _Aurora borealis_, or northern
lights as it is called, grew brighter and brighter every night until the
whole heavens in the region of the North Pole were scintillating with
streamers that spread out like a great fan, reaching over our heads and
far to the south. The first mate said that it was as brilliant an aurora
as he had ever seen and his explanation of it was that the spots on the
sun had been unusually large and numerous.

Not only did the sun’s activity show itself in the aurora, but it set up
a violent magnetic storm on earth and this made the compass needles
oscillate to and fro as much as 1½ degrees on each side of their normal
positions. Now magnetic storms always interfere very seriously with the
operation of both overland telegraph lines and cable systems where the
circuit is completed through the earth.

I had heard some one say, or had read somewhere, that a magnetic storm
would interfere in the same way with wireless messages and I was fearful
for some time that it would put our signals out of commission. But all
through the magnetic storm Mackey and I sent our messages without the
slightest trouble--indeed if we had not been told that a magnetic storm
was on we should never have guessed it. Evidently wireless had scored
another point over the wire systems and another pet theory was put on
the ice to cool.

We sailed up the coast keeping pretty close to it while the _Midnight
Sun_ steamed up and out from it until we were fifty or more miles apart.
Now here is where wireless came in, in catching seals. Over the
constantly broadening gap between our ships Mackey and I kept their
Captains right in touch with each other.

The Captain of his ship _wirelessed_ that there were any number of old
seals about him and this showed, the first mate told me, that there were
patches of _white coats_, as the young harp-seals are called, somewhere
in the neighborhood.

Our ship immediately headed in his direction and a night’s steaming
brought us within a few miles of the _Midnight Sun_, but we did not see
any white coats either. But after we scouted around for five or six
hours we sighted a patch of hundreds upon hundreds of little seal babies
basking on the ice floes in the sun. My Captain ordered me to signal the
good news of our find to the Captain of the _Midnight Sun_; he in turn
steamed at once for our ship and when she came up the killing began.

These seals are called _harp-seals_ because they have brownish yellow
bodies and on the back of each one is a big black mark like a harp. The
old harp-seals start from way up north of Melville Sound in the early
part of the winter and by March they are off the Labrador coast. There
tens of thousands of them herd together on the drifting ice when the
little _white-coats_, as the baby seals are called because their fur is
so white, are born and, curiously enough, nearly all of them are born on
the same day.

It was a great sight to see these fat roly-poly baby seals lying on
their backs on the drifting ice and using their flippers to fan
themselves with to keep cool.

A few days later the ships were so close to each other that Mackey and I
visited back and forth across the ice while the crews were busy taking
the seals. When we headed for St. Johns we had on board our ship more
than twenty-five thousand sealskins, which was as big a load as we could
carry, while the _Midnight Sun_ had nearly fifty thousand and together
we broke all previous records.

This being the case these hardened Arctic Captains were as tickled as a
couple of sea-urchins and both agreed that wireless was the greatest
sealing scheme introduced since steamers took the place of schooners.

Before we bore up for St. Johns there were great doings on board both
ships. Rockets were fired in lieu of regular fireworks and Mackey,
having the most powerful set, sent a message to old _Boreas_ and old
_Arcticus_ who are pioneers in the refrigerating business, and if the
_North Pole_ has an aerial suspended from it and the latter has a
receiver attached to it, I doubt not but that they listened-in to the
first wireless signals ever sent within the polar circle; if so, they
heard some mighty fine things said about themselves and the glorious,
though, withal frigid, country they rule over.

I wouldn’t have missed that experience for a million dollars--what’s
that?--well, not for a hundred dollars in real money anyway.

CHAPTER V--MY ADVENTURES IN THE TROPICS

When Bert Mackey and I got back to New York we were both in the same
boat--to wit, we were without jobs. On the way down, though, Bert
unfolded a very alluring scheme by which we could, he allowed, make
_oodles_ of money and at the same time stand a chance of meeting with
something that looked like real adventure.

“Do you know, Jack,” Bert said confidentially, “that I went into the
wireless game simply because it appeared to me to offer the best chance
of meeting Miss Adventure. I’ve been at it for five years now and I’ve
never even had the pleasure of getting a look at her face.

“Wherever I go she is always on the other side of the street and
although I tip my hat to her she never looks up, much less gives me a
_tumble_. I took that sealing job because I certainly thought I’d meet
Miss Adventure somewhere among the ice floes and blizzards of the Arctic
North. But no! all I did was to sit in my cabin and send what my Captain
wanted to tell your Captain and receive what your Captain had to say to
my Captain. And to what purpose? So that a few rich men could get richer
by enabling vain women to run around the streets of New York and a few
other big burgs bedecked out in the skins of baby seals that had been
clubbed to death. Now that’s big business for men and women to be in,
isn’t it?

“I wish I could get a job on a pirate ship or start a revolution in some
punk Central American country. And it’s funny,” he went on
complainingly, “how a fellow like you, who has only been in the service
a couple of years, could meet with a big adventure like the sinking of
the _Andalusian_, I’d have given a year of my life to have been in your
place.

“Now down along the Amazon River there are great rubber plantations,
savage tribes of Indians, tigers, monkeys, boa-constrictors and all the
garnishings that go to make up a first class tropical jungle. I know a
man in New York that does business with a rubber concern in Para, Brazil
and he told me, just before we sailed north, that the _Compagnie
Francaise de Telegraphie sans Fil_ had a contract to put up half a dozen
wireless stations along the river.

“It strikes me, Jack, that it would be a good scheme if you and I took a
trip down there and looked over the ground. What do you say?”

Having a few dollars in my pocket and nothing else to do at that
particular moment I said O K and agreed to join him provided we could
get free transportation on some liner going down there. Bert assured me
that he could _fix it_ and he was as good as his word.

So it was we sailed in due time on the _Ceara_ of the _Holliday Line_.
It was an old tub that stood every chance of having on board Miss
Adventure and I didn’t doubt in the least but that Bert would have ample
opportunity to strike up an acquaintance with her and to swim back, if
he got back at all, for the _Ceara_ had no wireless equipment--such was
her regard for the laws of the U.S.

As luck would have it we had fine weather and she beat her way down just
as she had for the last quarter of a century if she was as old as she
looked. We enjoyed the trip, at that, for there were not many passengers
aboard and all of them, especially the South Americans, were very
pleasant people. Having learned that we had never been in South America
we were told that it was a great country full of possibilities for young
men with some capital but that if we were unacquainted there it would be
better for us to _about face_ at Para and go home.

Bert and I had other thoughts on the subject but as we were nearing the
Equator I kind of wondered why I had not stayed at home selling
crude-oil engines or taking the post on the new _Cunarder_ that Sammis
said he’d get for me, or doing something else that was nice and cool.

In a little less than a month’s time we landed at Para, as it is
popularly called, or Belem, as it is more properly called, or to give it
its full name _Santa Maria de Del Belem do Para_. Just as New Orleans is
built back from the Gulf of Mexico, on the Mississippi River so Para is
situated a hundred miles inland from the Atlantic on the Amazon River.
So this is Para from which Para rubber comes, thought I as I looked
about, and indeed I should have known it had I sailed into port with my
eyes shut for the smell of rubber everywhere permeated the air.

But don’t think for a moment that it is made up of a lot of adobe houses
as so many Mexican towns are. Far from it, for in architecture it is a
miniature reproduction of Rio de Janeiro, which city in turn looks more
like Paris than any other in either North or South America. Nor is Para
a small burg, for it has a population of a hundred thousand now and some
day, if the Amazon valley is ever developed, it may be larger than Rio
de Janeiro, aye, even than New York itself.

Different from the equatorial city I expected to find, where every one
had nothing to do but to lie under a palm tree, look at the blue sky,
smoke cigarettes and agitate the air with a fan, there was much to do,
for there rubber is King, and the white, yellow and black folks were
doing it with a good deal of vim too. The demand for rubber, we learned,
was greater than it had ever been before and consequently the people
were prosperous and happy.

After a deal of searching we located the offices of the _Compagnie
Francaise de Telegraphie sans Fil_ and Bert explained to Señor Benoit,
the manager, that we were a couple of wireless operators from the United
States. The manager acted as though he was dazed and Bert handed him our
credentials to set him right.

In a moment, though, he recovered and I wish you could have seen the way
he greeted us! You’d have thought he’d found two long lost brothers for
he hugged us in turn and almost wept on our necks. I thought the heat
and the smell of the rubber had made him _nutty_ where as it was only
his great good luck. Believe me, he knew exactly what it was all about.

He had come on from France six months before to put up a chain of
wireless stations beginning at Para and on up the river for 2500 miles
to Equitos, at intervals of about 500 miles. Before the wireless men got
to Jurutty they had been taken down with the fever and were even then on
their way to Para, and so the job was open and ready for us to tackle.
He agreed to pay us a million _reis_, including all our expenses and a
million _reis_ for every month we remained as operators in his company’s
service. It didn’t take half-an-eye to see that if we could stick it out
for a few months we’d be regular millionaires.

“I want to make our wireless system a success to show the Brazilian
capitalists its superiority over the wire system. They have an overhead
line stretched along the banks of the river but it gives very poor
service for any one of a number of reasons, chief among them being that
it is hard to keep iron wires from rusting away owing to the great
amount of rain, and when copper wire is used the Indians have a great
liking for it and cut out a length here and there whenever they want it.

“With wireless it is different and if I can only get the stations set up
and working I will show the advantages of it over the wire system very
quickly. Wireless will be safer and surer for the rains can’t affect it
and I am quite sure the Indians will not steal the ether.”

We took passage on the _Asuncion_, one of the _Amazon Steamship
Company’s_ fleet of small steamers and sailed up the Rio Amazonia, or as
we call it the Amazon River, the mightiest of all flowing waters. On
either side of it for hundreds of miles lay a tangled mass of tropical
vegetation--the jungle in very truth. The villages were far between but
occasionally we saw the rude huts of a few settlers who had come forth
from the civilized quarters of the world to sap out their energies and
make their fortunes in rubber.

We were told that a mighty small area of the jungle had been explored
though a few expeditions had made their devious ways through some parts
of it either for scientific purposes, such as studying the vegetation
and living things, or for commercial reasons as getting plants for
medicines and more frequently rubber.

And rain! I can’t remember a day down there when it didn’t rain. The
reason it rains so much is this: the warm winds that blow up the river
from the Atlantic carry a lot of moisture with them and the winds that
blow down the river from the Andes are cold and when they come together,
the moisture condenses and it rains.

The scenery looked about the same all the way along--just one mass of
tropical trees of all kinds for the warp and these were woven together
with vines of every description for the woof. I could see our finish
before we started in to “look over the ground” as Bert had suggested
when we were in dear old New York. Yes, dear little old New York--how I
wished I were back there again.

As for rubber plantations they were there, the savage tribes of Indians
were there too--I didn’t see them on the trip up stream but they were
there all right just as Bert had said. There were no tigers as Bert
guessed but we saw the onca, or jaguar (pronounced _ja-gwar_), a buff
feline beast covered with black spots that is a second cousin to the
tiger in both size and ferociousness.

The whole blooming tribe of monkeys with faces on them that ought to
make a fellow ashamed to look at himself in a glass, and make you know
that Darwin was right; boa-constrictors and seven million, more or less
of other kinds of snakes were there--in fact equatorial America was all
that Bert, or I, or any one else, ever dreamed it was and then multiply
it by about a hundred and you will get a faint impression of it. Yes,
beasts, birds, fishes, snakes and insects end without number, and each a
marvel of its kind, were there and so was the Indian princess.

There was the _tapir_, a sort of a cross between a horse and a
rhinocerous having a short proboscis as though its snout was made of
rubber and some one had stretched it for him; it is a shy and harmless
beastie that moves about chiefly at night. The _sloth_, a greenish-brown
animal whose chief business it is to hang back downward from the branch
of a tree and to sleep away its life.

The _ant-eater_ who picks up a living by eating ants and other insects.
All hail to the ant-eater! I’ve seen a dozen other animals down there
that have no business outside of a jungle, or a zoo or a menagerie.
Lizards are there in great variety from those that change their colors
while you wait to those the natives serve up for you to eat.

And talking about colors, no coal tar dye was ever discovered that could
begin to equal the plumage of the birds down there. Large parrots called
_macaws_, parakeets, which are little parrots with long tails, cockatoos
and love birds, which belong to the parrot family, and others on down to
humming birds that are scarcely larger than wasps, are as thick as
microbes in sour milk.

But the jungle is the paradise of the insects; there is every
conceivable kind and then as many more that are beyond human belief:
gigantic, gorgeous butterflies, beetles that looked as if they had been
stencilled with the rainbow colors of the sun, and flies as numerous per
square unit of space as grains of powder in the charge of an 8 gauge
shell.

The ants, though, have all the other insects _faded_ and everything else
in the jungle that lives on the ground. Next to William Hohenzollern’s
armies that devastated Belgium and Flanders rank the Amazon armies of
ants that march out to seek what and whom they can devour. Everything
from a jaguar on down that gets in their way becomes meat and drink for
them.

You have, of course, often watched our little fireflies and wondered
what kind of an apparatus was installed in their anatomy which produces
the intermittent, phosphorescent light as they flit around. Well, down
in Brazil there are fireflies that look like electric lights. They
measure nearly 4 inches long, and 1¼ inches wide and carry three light
reservoirs--two in the thorax and one in the abdomen--and these give off
a bright greenish light.

When the natives want a light they simply catch a few fireflies, put
them in a bottle and cork it up. They could read by this light if they
could read but they can’t so the chief use to which they put the
fire-fly lights is to hunt around in their beds to see what has crawled
in with them. This, then, is the cheapest form of light and, according
to Sir Oliver Lodge, if man could produce an electric light with as
little expenditure of power as the fire-fly then a boy turning the
handle of an electric machine could light up a good sized factory.

The things that live in the Amazon River are just as plentiful as those
that inhabit the jungle. The _manatee_, or _sea-cow_ as it is called, is
the largest having a length of something like 10 feet. If you were far
enough away from it you might mistake it for a seal for it has the same
general outline. Turtles grow to be 3 feet long, and _oddsfish_, there’s
enough different kinds to stock the seven seas and then have some left
over for the boarding houses.

I could talk to you for a week about the strange living creatures I saw
in and along the banks of the Amazon and in the jungle, but the trees
and plants are just as wonderful. For instance, there are palms out of
which palm-leaf fans are made and palm trees that grow up as high as
wireless masts and on their _main trucks_ and _pennants_ are cocoanuts.
Trees that when you tap ’em rubber, milk or cold water comes forth
depending on the kind of a tree it happens to be. Also a large number of
most uncommon fruits are there in great abundance.

At last we arrived at our destination, Jurutty, a village about 500
miles east of Manaos. When we landed my first and only thought was of
home and mother. My trip to the Arctic was a delightful little pleasure
jaunt as against this one up the Amazon River! Had I been castaway on
the moon, aye, even on Mars, I couldn’t have felt more remote from my
native land than when I stepped ashore at Jurutty. And yet, would you
believe it, now that it is in the past tense I would like to go there
once again.

We were met at the dock by Señor Castro, the _fezendero_, that is the
owner of the _fezenda_, which means the plantation. He was a mixture of
Portuguese and Indian but none the less a gentleman for that. A motley
crew of negroes, men, women and children with very little clothing on
and Indians who hadn’t the remotest idea why any one should wear clothes
at all, and mixtures of these races, were also at hand to see the
newcomers.

Señor Castro was right glad to see us and after shaking hands with us
half-a-dozen times he led the way back through a path in the jungle to
his _fezenda_. We dined in his home as I had never dined before nor have
since, drank coffee that threw the surpassing beverage of the same name
which is brewed in Child’s and the Waldorf-Astoria in the shade and
smoked his long tobacco wrapped cigarettes.

Then we talked wireless. The apparatus, as Señor Benoit had said, was
there and Señor Castro assured us that we should have all the help we
needed to set it up. He told us that there was an electric generator and
a crude-oil engine to furnish the power to run it with--and yet there
were hundreds of thousands of horse power to be had from the Amazon--but
which had never been tapped. Fortunately I happened to know all about
the history, theory and practise of oil engines and how to sell them if
the alleged prospects had the slightest idea of buying such power units.

Señor Castro also had a billiard table, a phonograph and other civilized
inventions to while away life as pleasantly as possible in the jungle,
and taking it all in all Bert and I considered that things were not
altogether against us.

After we turned in our bobbinet curtained beds that night all went well
until we were awakened in the small hours by the sound of a woman’s
voice outside. Thinking it was some female in distress Bert awakened the
_fezendero_ only to be told with great courtesy that it was not a woman
but an _organ bird_. Bert returned saying something about forming a
_Society for the Prevention of Jungle Noises at Night_, and we slept
again.

In the morning Señor Castro took us out to show us his _fezenda_. Three
small horses were saddled ready for us to ride--though I can ride a wave
at sea much better than I can ride a quadruped on land. We rode around
his rubber plantation and Señor Castro showed us how the rubber trees
are tapped, explained that the fluid which comes from the trees is not
the sap of the wood but of the bark and we saw how the natives stick
little tin-cups to the trees with bits of clay to catch the fluid.

On returning we rode along the edge of the jungle and Señor Castro
cautioned us “never to go into the jungle for you will either get lost,
be killed by jaguars, bitten by snakes, or by fever laden insects which
are just as bad.”

“To the south of us,” he went on calmly, “are the
_Caripunas_--aboriginal Indians that kill and eat people if they get a
chance.”

“Cannibals?” I asked to make sure I had heard aright, and when he said
“yes” I could feel an electric oscillation run up and down my spinal
column.

“How far away from here are they?” questioned Bert with a peculiar light
in his eyes I had noticed whenever he spoke of adventure.

“The village is about 200 kilometers from here,” Señor Castro replied.
“It’s strange but they seem to have some kind of a sixth sense by which
they can tell the moment strangers arrive--some kind of a wireless
telegraph system, I guess,” and he laughed.

Then he went on: “I don’t doubt but that they have been stalking us
because you fellows are new to the place. It’s seldom that any of them
ever come across this road because I’ve put bullets into a couple of
them and they won’t get away with any more of my rubber men on this side
of the line.”

I asked him if they had captured many of his men.

“Every time my men tread the jungle outside of the _fezenda_ they are
taken unless they have an Indian guide with them.”

“Oh, I see, they are Union savages,” said Bert and he added, “I know I’m
going to like this place, Señor Castro.”

In the days that followed we got right down to business for we wanted
that million _reis_ as soon as we could get it. We unpacked the
materials for the aerial first and every move we made was watched with
great interest by the villagers. The _phosphor-bronze_ wire for the
aerial seemed to have an especial attraction for them, for they would
pick it up, look critically at it and examine it as carefully as though
they were looking for flaws in it.

There were two palm trees at least 100 feet high and about 250 feet
apart, and Bert and I decided to use these for the masts. When we had
the aerial assembled with the leading-in wire soldered to it I asked if
any one there could climb the palm tree and every man, woman and child
said that they could. I gave one of the half-breeds a coil of
quarter-inch hemp rope to hoist the aerial with and showed him how I
wanted the end of the aerial made fast to the tree top and then told him
to go aloft.

I wish you could have seen that fellow climb the tree! I used to think
our old time sailors were about as clever as they made ’em when it comes
to climbing but there’s no use talking they’re too civilized--too far
removed from the monkey family to know how to climb anything but a rope
ladder.

The half-breed grasped the back of the tree with the open palms of his
hands and placing the bare soles of his feet in front like a jack-knife
he just naturally _walked_ up it. These same fellows can travel for
miles through the jungle by swinging themselves from vine to vine and
going as fast as you or I can walk. So you see there are some things an
ignorant Amazonian can do that an educated New Yorker can’t do. And thus
does Nature’s law of compensation work out.

After we got the aerial swung between the palms we set the engine and
dynamo in place on their foundations and with some tinkering we got them
to running pretty smoothly. To Señor Castro’s delight we had enough
current not only to work the wireless set but for lighting up his house
as well. Last of all came the transmitter and receiver and although
these were of French make we had no difficulty in either installing or
operating them and it was a _cinch_ to get either Manaos on the west or
Almeirir on the east.

It seemed that the operators at both stations could get us a deal better
than we could get them though all of the transmitters were fitted with
one kilowatt transformers. But never mind, we had established
communication, thus fulfilling our part of the agreement, and Señor
Castro, by all the arts of a true gentleman, showed us how deeply he
appreciated our work. Nothing was too good for us. The only flaw in the
whole system was the operator at Manaos. He was like the sloth in that
he was just as liable to go to sleep as he was to stay awake.

I believe that every message I ever sent had something in it about
rubber, whether the body of it related to the doctor, medicines, or what
not, for along the Amazon River they live and die by that commodity.

After we had been at Jurutty a few weeks Bert and I got so we knew the
_fezenda_ about as well as its owner did and we walked or rode about the
place either alone or with Señor Castro for we made it a point for one
or the other to be on duty all the time and so make a reputation for
ourselves and for future United States operators who might happen that
way.

I often thought, in my rambles, that I could _feel_ the presence of some
human being back of a tree, or see a human shadow come and go before I
could really make it out, but as this happened very often I came to
believe it was merely a case of _nerves_. I talked with Bert about it
and he said he frequently heard and saw things too but that there was
nothing more to it than a snake or an animal moving about.

“Señor Castro,” he said, “has told us this little yarn about cannibals
so that we would keep inside the _fezenda_. There used to be tribes of
cannibals in the interior but all that sort of thing has been wiped out
by the Jesuit missionaries long ago.”

I was out for a walk one morning not long after and I heard a monkey
crying as though he was in great pain. I located him a dozen or twenty
paces in the jungle and went after him. He seemed to have gotten tangled
up in some vines and the harder he tried to get away the tighter they
held him.

Just as I reached up and released him a piece of wood was slipped into
my mouth by some one from behind making it impossible for me to utter a
sound and before I could take my revolver from its holster my hands were
pinioned back of me and my feet were bound so that I couldn’t kick, much
less run. Although I kept my eyes open I couldn’t see a man-jack of my
captors nor did they make the slightest noise.

They lifted me up bodily and after a few manœuvers in penetrating the
jungle we finally reached a pretty well trodden trail and then they set
me down and took the gag out of my mouth. Four strapping big, copper
colored bucks with splashes of red paint on their stark naked bodies
were the imps of Satan who had so unceremoniously abducted me. I would
have given just $7.00 in American gold to have gotten each one of them
to hold on to the spark-gap of a 10-inch induction coil for just one
second.

They were a quartet of jim-dandies and all they needed was a stove-pipe
hat apiece to complete their outfits.

Again they boosted me into the air and with a savage at each corner of
me they started off on a dog-trot, whither I knew not but what I did
know was that I was a goner. After a march, or a trot, of two days and
nights we came to an Indian village. There were several hundred men,
women and children savages about but they were dressed better than the
hunters who had brought me in for each one wore a string around his or
her waist and a rattle-box on her or his ankle.

If any one thinks that cannibalism has been wiped out in the Amazon
jungles he has another think coming for I saw with these--my own
eyes--the whole horrible ceremony gone through with of eating human
flesh.

After I had been there a few days a couple of savages, one with brown
hair and beard and the other with red hair and beard, began talking to
me in Spanish after trying Portuguese on me. I was quite surprised when
they told me they were rubber men from Señor Castro’s _fezenda_ whom the
cannibals had captured nearly a year before.

We planned escape by the hour, though one of them said that was just
what these man eaters wanted us to do and that when a fellow tried to
escape they would recapture him, bring him back, put him in the
proverbial pot and let him stew in his own juice. We were of a mind that
it would be better to be live men turned savages than to be cooked men
eaten by cannibals.

His most high worshipful King Oopla relieved me of my revolver, and came
nearly shooting up the village,--which I heartily wished he had
done,--also my watch, knife, compass and other trinkets which four
former articles he generously kept for himself and the latter he gave to
a wench whom I afterwards learned was his daughter, the Princess
Jaci--which is as near as I could come to pronouncing her name. I called
her _Princess Mabel_, the latter name being that of a _shine
kitchen-mechanic_ we once had.

Her face was thin and small and was topped by an enormous mass of
frizzled hair while her eyes set at a slight angle so that you couldn’t
just tell whether she was looking at you to the leeward or a rubber tree
to the windward.

Although her eyes were thus slightly out of alignment and her mouth was
cut on much too large a scale, which gave her a hard look, she was
always smiling good naturedly.

The first thing I knew Princess Mabel began to hang around me and to eat
and drink out of my cocoa-nut shell. She was an artistic creation in
olive drab, small, and lithe, but withal a very amiable and charming
maiden as cannibal maidens go.

She hadn’t been spoiled by working in high-toned families in Montclair
yet. I fought shy of her for some time for I thought they wanted to put
up a job on me and that the moment I gave her a pleasant look I’d be on
my way to the stew pot; this belief was further fixed in my mind by
occasionally finding a skull, a rib, ulna, fibula, and other parts of
the human skeleton lying around loose.

The rubber men, who could speak the Indian tongue a little, assured me,
however, that the King had taken a great fancy to me--I suppose because
I looked so young and tender--and that the Princess herself thought very
well of me. The King’s idea, they informed me, was to have me marry the
princess so as to improve the royal strain just as his own savage self
had been improved in the slave days of South America when the niggers
would run away from their masters and seek decent society among the
cannibals.

“For heaven’s sake, boy,” one of the rubber men said to me, “make up
your mind to marry her or we’ll all be served up _a la_ chop suey in the
grill room.”

Henceforth I treated her with all the courtesy and dignity I could
command and she reciprocated by showing me where her papa kept my
pistol, my watch and my compass--things I was glad to know, and she gave
me these stones too, which I am told by dealers in gems in Maiden Lane
to be diamonds. How much are they worth? No one knows until I have them
cut.

Everything went fine for the next couple of months but I was getting
pretty sick of the life and kept scheming to get away. This tribe of
savages used powerful bows and arrows barbed with bone and tipped with
feathers. It was all I could do to bend them but the King had one made
for me that was more to my strength and I learned to use it with
precision and great effect.

Every day I would go hunting and I always had the company of a couple of
pleasant secret service savages. Whatever I bagged I gave King Oopla and
Princess Mabel the very choicest of it and I always tried to get game
that was to their liking. We became great friends and I wouldn’t leave
these good simple minded people--no not for anything in the world unless
I got a good chance.

But I went a little farther every day and often lost myself from my
savage guides, but, never fear, I always came back like a dutiful
prospective son-in-law should. On returning one day from a hunting trip
that had lasted longer than-any of the others I had ever made, I found
they had killed one of the rubber men and were cooking him _en
casserole_.

That evening at sundown the ceremonies began and when it had grown dark
great bonfires were lit and the cannibals, with hideous painted faces
and bodies were dancing as if their very lives depended on it to the
bombastic beating of tom-toms, Old King Oopla had on his dress suit
which consisted of a pair of long horns projecting from either side of
his head, a red undershirt, and a celluloid cuff on each ankle. Her
royal highness, Princess Mabel, was bedecked out in a wonderful
head-gear and a fluffy ballet skirt built up of macaw and other
brilliant feathers. A few strings of human teeth around her neck
completed her bridal costume. She looked _awful_ nice.

The King, Mabel, and myself were squatting on a kind of throne built up
in the center of the ring of dancers but so enthusiastic did these royal
personages become that the King and the Princess must needs have a fling
at it too.

After keeping the dance going into the small hours of the morning they
stopped and gorged themselves with human flesh until they fell down in
their tracks, actually drunk with the gruesome orgy. It was a
preliminary feast to my marriage with Princess Mabel. When at last the
coast was clear I recovered not only my revolver but another one from
the hole in the tree where the King hid his treasures and giving it to
Señor Paes, the surviving rubber man, we stole forth determined on
gaining our freedom or else going to our deaths.

At the end of every mile we covered I put my ear to the ground and
_listened in_, but there were no sounds of our being followed. After ten
hours’ travel over trails that I knew I figured that we were nearer
Jurutty than to the cannibal village. We kept right on and after another
five hours my ground telegraph told me that human footsteps were coming
and I knew it was a question of only a little time until the savages
would overtake us.

When they were within arrow shot of us we each stood back of a tree on
either side of the trail and as a squad of them came up unsuspectingly
we blazed away at them with our revolvers and there were eight cannibal
carcasses ready for the buzzards to pick.

When we reached the _fezenda_ Bert came near to giving the buzzards
still more pickings, for he mistook my companion and myself, with our
long, unkempt hair and bare bodies, as brown as those of Indians, for a
precious pair of cannibals and he took a couple of pot-shots at us.

After we had taken our baths and put on some honest-to-goodness clothes
we had a long talk-fest. Señor Castro, he said, believed that I had been
devoured by jaguars, but he had somehow felt that I had been captured by
the cannibals. He had searched into the depths of the jungle for some
trace of me until he was taken down with the fever where he lay nigh
unto death for a month. When he got well he concluded he’d go north for
in the meantime Señor Castro had gotten another operator.

“I’m certainly an unlucky dog, Jack,” Bert bemoaned his fate; “I can’t
understand why I couldn’t have had even a look-in on that cannibal
business. Here I’ve been down with the fever while you’ve had as fine an
adventure as ever befell a man. Back to Broadway for mine where the only
cannibal princesses I shall ever see are those that trip the light
fantastic in the chorus.”

“Truly, I’m sorry, old man,” I consoled him, “but it wasn’t my fault
though it was your misfortune. You’ll get yours yet, so cheer up.”

A week later we were ready to sail down the Amazon to Para, there to
take ship for New York. Señor Castro paid us the full amount agreed upon
by the manager of the _Compagnie_ _Francaise de Telegraphie sans Fil_
and we had in all a total of about 4,000,000 _reis_ between us--in fact
we were, as we had anticipated, bloated millionaires. I had a satchel
full of bills of big denomination--there is neither gold nor silver
money down there.

When we got to Para, though, and we began to spend our money we were
astonished and disgusted to find that a meal cost about 6000 _reis_, the
street-car fare was 400 _reis_ and the postage on a letter home was 300
_reis_. In other words, 1,000,000 _reis_ was just about equivalent to
325 dollars in our money. Well, we were millionaires while we thought we
were anyhow.

What about the diamonds I have? I don’t know but if they are the real
thing I think I’ll organize a company, go down there with a machine gun,
wipe out the cannibals and open up a diamond field.

CHAPTER VI--WORKING WITH MARCONI

I must tell you about a fine experience I had with Mr. Marconi when he
received the first signals across the Atlantic, but before I do so I
want to say a few words concerning the great inventor and his wireless
telegraph.

Quite a number of people seem to be imbued with the idea that no one
ever thought of sending messages by wireless before Mr. Marconi--in fact
that he just put together a few old electrical instruments and forthwith
sent and received messages over space without any connecting wires.

Of course the basis for these erroneous impressions is that Mr. Marconi
is said to be, and rightly, the inventor of the wireless telegraph. Now
I want to put those young fellows who are reading this account straight
on the matter. Many men may work on a device and none of them hit upon
the thing that is needed to make it practical; then some fine day a
genius will happen along and see just what the device lacks and add it
to the general collection, or he will put something to it, perhaps
accidentally, that does the business, and this last touch which enables
it to be used gives the man who does it the right to be called its
inventor.

Now, dozens of men, including Morse, Edison and Tesla in this country,
and Hughes, Pierce and Lodge in England, worked on the scheme of sending
messages without wires; but they either experimented along the wrong
line, or the few who worked on the right line did not push far enough
ahead to get anywhere. The result was that by the time Mr. Marconi
tackled it all the instruments that were needed for telegraphing without
wires were at hand but no one had quite caught on how to use them.

Nearly every one thinks, too, that it is far more wonderful to send
wireless messages than it is to send messages over a wire; but this is
not the case at all, though both, I trow, are wonderful enough. When we
say a message is sent by wireless we do not mean, by a long shot, that
it goes from the place where it is sent to the place where it is
received without anything between them to carry it. Nor again do we mean
that it goes to a single receiver and nowhere else.

For instance, when you talk to a person ordinarily you convey to him
your message without wires, but it is the air between your mouth and his
ear that carries the message, that is, waves are set up in the air and
these are called _sound waves_. Naturally since the air is everywhere on
the surface of the earth the sounds you make travel in every direction.

A better example of wireless is a lighted lamp and your eye, for in this
case the lighted lamp acts as a transmitter and sets up very short waves
in the _ether_, which are called _light waves_ and these likewise travel
in every direction. The ether is a substance that is 15 trillion times
lighter than the air and it fills the whole universe, and when the
electric waves set up by a light in it strike your eye the optic nerve
carries the sensation of them to your brain and you _see_ the light.

The next thing to know is that light waves and wireless waves are
exactly the same kind of waves, that is, both are caused by electric
stresses and magnetic whirls in the ether, but while light waves are in
the neighborhood of the ten-millionth of an inch in length, wireless
waves are so long they make no impression at all on the eye.

That light is electric waves in the ether has been known for the last
couple of hundred years and later on scientific sharks believed there
were other and longer electric waves but they didn’t know how to produce
them or to receive them until 1888.

In that year Heinrich Hertz, a young German college professor,
discovered that when an electric spark was made by any kind of an
apparatus the positive and negative electric charges in uniting together
would not only break down the air to make the spark, but would form an
_oscillating current_, that is, a current which surges to and fro
hundreds of thousands of times a second, and that this _high frequency
current_, as it is called, sets up waves in the ether just as the
vibrations of a bell set up waves in the air.

Hertz made an apparatus by which he could produce electric waves of
different lengths and this he called an _oscillator_. It consisted of a
couple of wires fixed to the balls of the spark-gap of an induction
coil, on the other and free end of which were soldered a couple of
sheets of copper. (See the accompanying picture.)

[Illustration: Hertz’s oscillator]

He also devised a simple apparatus to detect the presence of these
waves--that is, to receive them, which he called a _resonator_, and this
was a cut wire ring with a little brass ball on each of its ends as
shown in the following diagram. Now when Hertz set his induction coil
going, streams of sparks were set up in the spark-gap of the oscillator
and _electric oscillations_, or high-frequency currents, surged from one
of the copper plates to the other and back again, and these sent out
trains of electric waves through the ether.

[Illustration: Hertz’s detector]

By holding his resonator, or as we would call it now, his _detector_, at
a little distance from his sending apparatus, when the latter sent out
the electric waves they would set up electric oscillations, or currents
of high frequency, in the ring detector and these in turn would make a
stream of little sparks jump across the gap between the balls.

Here, then, was a complete wireless sending and receiving apparatus, but
it would work only a short distance, probably not over 100 feet. But
Hertz was not trying to invent a wireless telegraph; all he wanted to
and did do was to prove that there were long electric waves and there
his work ended.

[Illustration: Coherer]

After Hertz had shown how long electric waves could be set up by the
sparks of an induction coil, other scientific chaps went to work to get
up a better scheme to detect them. In 1890 Edouard Branly, of France,
discovered that when metal filings were put in a tube and electric waves
were allowed to fall on them the resistance of the filings was lowered,
and Sir Oliver Lodge, in 1894, found that this was caused by the filings
being drawn closer together, that is, they _cohered_. By connecting a
_coherer_ (see the diagram) as he called the filings detector, to a
galvanometer and a dry-cell he was able to detect the presence of
electric waves up to distances of 500 feet.

[Illustration: Lightning detector]

A year later Popoff, of Russia, made a receiver for studying electric
storms--lightning is only gigantic electric sparks--and this consisted
of a coherer, a battery, a relay and an electric bell. Popoff connected
one side of the coherer with a wire which he ran up into the air, or
_aerial wire_ as we call it now, and the other side of the coherer he
grounded, as shown in the diagram. This was the first time that an
aerial wire and a ground had ever been used in connection with a
coherer. With this apparatus Popoff was able to hear the coming of
storms for hours before they appeared above the horizon.

About this time Guglielmo Marconi, who was only 20 years old, was going
to the University at Bologna, Italy. Prof. Righi who lectured on physics
there was repeating Hertz’s experiments and used Branly’s coherer for
detecting the electric waves. This set Marconi to thinking and it was
not long before he had an experimental wireless set of his own, thus
becoming the first wireless _kid_.

The chief difference between his transmitter and that of Hertz was a
telegraph key which he put in the battery circuit so that he could break
up the sparks into dots and dashes. He also set a reflector back of the
apparatus to concentrate the electric waves into a beam to make them go
in a given direction when they would be more powerful and cover a longer
distance. But Hertz did the reflector stunt first.

Marconi’s receiver was made up of an apparatus just like Popoff’s except
that he connected an old-time Morse printing register in the battery
circuit so that when the electric waves acted on the coherer the signals
would be printed on a tape in dots and dashes.

In his first attempts, then, to send wireless messages, young Marconi
had done four things and these were (1) to see the possibilities of
using electric waves set up by a Hertz apparatus for sending messages;
(2) to put a telegraph key in the sending circuit; (3) to use a Popoff
receiver for receiving the electric waves, and (4) to put a Morse
register in the receiving circuit. These were the first big steps in
building up a wireless telegraph set, but none of them formed an
invention.

I do not know just when Marconi added the aerial and ground to his
transmitter--Popoff had used an aerial and ground with his receiver--but
the aerial and ground formed his great claim to being the inventor of
the wireless telegraph, for it was the aerial and ground which enabled
him to cover long distances.

In 1896 Marconi went to England and there applied for a patent in which
he showed an aerial and ground connected to his sending and receiving
apparatus (see the diagram) but even at this time he did not understand
the importance of a high, well insulated aerial and a good ground.

[Illustration: Wireless telegraph]

On arriving in London this boy, with the big idea in the back of his
head and a lot of business ability in front of it, went to Sir William
Pierce who was then at the head of the British Post Office and offered
to give him a demonstration of his new wireless telegraph. As Sir
William had long been interested in the possibility of wireless
telegraphy he was agreeable. The outcome of it was that one station was
rigged up in the General Post Office and another on the Thames
embankment about 300 feet away.

These experiments were successful enough to interest the War Office and
he was asked to show what he could do over longer distances. Salisbury
Plain was chosen for the trials and by placing reflectors back of the
sending and receiving apparatus he was able to telegraph over a distance
of about 2 miles.

Marconi now commenced to experiment with aerials and grounds in order to
increase the effective range of his apparatus and with them he was able
to cover the distance of 3 miles between Lowernock and Flat Holm.
Sometimes in these trials the dots and dashes would be printed good and
clear and at others they were all jumbled up.

The inventor was trying all sorts of schemes to get satisfactory
results, but nothing helped until he heightened the aerial wire on his
sending apparatus. Presto! the signals came in clear and without a miss.
Here then was the whole secret of wireless telegraphy--the higher the
aerial the farther messages could be sent with the same amount of power.

This was the real beginning of wireless telegraphy and from that moment
on Marconi’s star began to rise. It was not long before he was
telegraphing over a space of eight miles, the aerials at both ends being
held up in the air by kites.

These astounding results had reached the ears of German scientists and
through the _pull_ of the former German Emperor, now plain Mr.
Hohenzollern, things were fixed so that Dr. Adolph Slaby, of the
Charlottenburg University, was allowed to be present while Marconi was
sending and receiving messages.

The learned doctor deliberately _swiped_ Marconi’s ideas and on
returning to the land of _kultur_ he bent his energies toward outdoing
and undoing the young inventor who showed him how to telegraph without
wires. Of course, Dr. Slaby invented a system of wireless telegraphy and
this was quickly used on the ships of what was formerly the German Navy.

But Marconi’s fame as the real inventor of the wireless telegraph had
too sound a bottom for his detractors to hurt him much and he went right
on about his work without the slightest caring whatever. He was next
invited by the King of Italy to visit his native land and to make some
experiments there. A shore station had been put up at Spezia and a
couple of war ships were fitted with wireless equipments. In the tests
which followed Marconi broke the record for wireless and his achievement
was the talk of the world.

Wireless, like its inventor, was on the upgrade and in England
_Marconi’s Wireless Telegraphy Company, Limited_, as it was at first
called, was organized for the purpose of installing his system on ship
and shore stations. Stations at Bournemouth and at Alum Bay on the Isle
of Wight, about 14 miles apart were put up and Marconi did a great deal
of experimenting and increased his range to 18 miles when he sent to and
received messages from an out-bound steamer.

No one could shut his eyes to the value of wireless at sea and
_Lloyd’s_, the great shipping corporation, had two stations put up at
Ballycastle and Rathlin Island on the northern coast of Ireland where
experiments were conducted to further test the reliability of the system
in all weathers.

The _Kingston Regatta_ was the next event in which wireless figured and
the _Daily Express_ of Dublin arranged with Marconi, or his company, to
install his apparatus on a ship and report the races to the shore
station for the benefit of their readers; and this was done without a
hitch. Talk about a _scoop_! Here was a _wireless scoop_. Can you beat
it!

About this time the Prince of Wales, afterward King Edward VII, met with
an accident and he went aboard the royal yacht _Osborne_ to recuperate.
Could Marconi fit up a station on it and also in the royal residence
_Osborne_ where Queen Victoria was staying so that communication might
be kept up between them? Of course he could and he did it with much
satisfaction and pleasure to his royal patrons and credit to himself.

The next installations of note were made by the _Marconi Company_ at
South Foreland Lighthouse and East Goodwin Lightship which lay off the
Goodwin Shoals about a dozen miles away. This was in December, 1898, and
very shortly after a steamer was stranded on the shoals. A _C Q D_
signal was instantly flashed from the lightship to the lighthouse and
brought help that saved the ship with its cargo which together were
worth a quarter of a million dollars.

Bigger things were now in order and greater distances were to be
spanned. Early in 1899 Marconi set up a station at Dover on the English
coast and another at Wimereaux on the French coast. The distance between
these stations was 30 miles but Marconi had no trouble in sending
messages forth and back across the English Channel.

This astounding feat made the _British Admiralty_ sit up and scan the
horizon and seeing wireless writ large upon it, it had Marconi put his
outfits on three cruisers that very year. During the naval manœuvers
which soon took place wireless as a factor in fighting was given a
thorough tryout with the result that the top-notch distance was reached
when the flagship of the fleet signaled orders to one of the cruisers at
a distance of 85 miles.

I remember distinctly how every one over here was talking about that
wonderful wireless and the boy who invented it. Consequently when the
_New York Herald_ announced that it had engaged Marconi to report the
_International Yacht Race_ at New York, the one word on everybody’s
tongue was _wireless_. A ship fitted with wireless that followed in the
wake of the yacht, and a shore station was used as in the _Kingston
Regatta_. Over 4,000 words were transmitted from the wireless ship to
the shore station where they were retransmitted by wire to the _Herald_
office in New York.

The Marconi interests got busy on this side of the _big wet_ and
organized a company to carry on the business over here. Stations were
put up in 1901 at different points on the Atlantic coast and also in
England. The _British Marconi Company_ entered into an agreement with
_Lloyd’s_ in which the latter agreed to use only the Marconi system for
a term of 14 years and that ships fitted with Marconi apparatus should
not exchange messages with ships carrying any other make of apparatus.
Then began the great business of installing Marconi apparatus on the
fleets of transatlantic shipping routes. Still Marconi wasn’t satisfied;
he wanted to and did do bigger things.

I hadn’t been home from South America more than a fortnight when it just
so happened that I _listened-in_ (without a receiver and quite
unintentionally I assure you) to a conversation between two officials of
a certain wireless company. The message I got was that Marconi was on
his way to St. Johns, Newfoundland, with a couple of assistants and that
his purpose was to find out how far he could receive messages from
passing steamers.

My subconscious self immediately wirelessed to my conscious self that it
would be a fitting piece of business for me to work under the great
inventor--though he was not much older than I, I knew perfectly well
that there was no use trying to get a job with him through the ordinary
channels for he had brought his own assistants from England with him
and, of course, none others were wanted.

Therefore, I said nothing to any one but quietly hopped on a train for
St. Johns, and trusted to luck for the rest. Did you ever notice, Mr.
Collins, that when you make up your mind to do a certain thing and you
try as hard as you can to do it, good luck generally meets you somewhere
along the road and gives you a lift?

Well, when I got to St. Johns, it was the 3rd of December, 1901. I went
into a second hand store and bought an outfit of clothes so that I would
look like the rest of the working people up there; and when I put them
on I flattered myself that I did; my face and hands tanned in the
tropics helping out _quite some_.

I learned that Marconi and his assistants had not arrived nor had any
one heard that they were to come. I figured it out that their coming was
either a secret or a hoax--in fact, I was inclined to the latter belief;
and I had great fears I was on a wild-goose chase and that I had spent
about half a million of my hard-earned Brazilian _reis_ for nothing. I
stuck around though, and on the 6th who should come to town but the
inventor of the wireless telegraph, though to look at him you would not
have suspected it. I did not make known to his assistants that I was an
operator but when the boxes and hamper which contained his instruments
were unloaded I jumped in and helped to put them on the wagon.

Mr. Marconi--now that I had seen him he was Mr.--and one of his
assistants left and the other remained behind to look after the bags and
baggage. He thought I was the helper of the driver of the dray and the
driver thought I was one of the assistants--or at least that’s what I
thought they thought. At any rate when we got the dray loaded I just
naturally jumped on and went with them.

Mr. Kemp, the assistant, instructed the driver to go to Signal Hill,
which is about half-a-mile from St. Johns and right at the mouth of the
harbor. When we got there I was nearly frozen but I buckled right down
and helped the drayman to unload the stuff and to carry it into the
barracks. When he had been paid and was ready to go I said to the
driver, “guess I’ll stay and help around,” and when he said “all right,”
I knew that matters were pretty well fixed. From that time on I made
myself generally useful as a first class roustabout.

While Mr. Kemp and I were busy unpacking the apparatus, kites and
balloons, Mr. Marconi and Mr. Paget came in. The inventor wore a fur cap
and a fur trimmed overcoat. He took these off, just like a common
everyday man, and stood by for a moment looking on. He didn’t say
anything and you can bet your last Brazilian _reis_ that I kept my mouth
shut. Now and then, though, I took a good look at him for he was,
indeed, no lesser personage than the great inventor of the wireless
telegraph--Guglielmo Marconi!

He was then 27 years old but he looked at least ten years older. His
father was an Italian and his mother was Irish, but Mr. Marconi, except
for his bluish eyes and rather light hair, looked strictly like a son of
sunny Italy. He had a high forehead, long and rather thin nose, largish
ears, a big mouth with a long upper lip which was covered with a
straggly mustache, a strong chin and deep-set, serious eyes that seemed
to be looking beyond whatever he was looking at.

Certainly he was not an inventor of the old school for he was well
groomed and dressed in an up-to-date business suit. One thing sure he
was not much of a talker and I soon observed that his great part in the
game of wireless was a thinking part.

His assistants set up a little apparatus which consisted of a receiver
only with a telephone receiver hooked up to it instead of the usual
Morse register. The aerial wire was led outside through a hard rubber
insulator in the window where it was fixed to but insulated from a stout
pole, set in the ground. To the free end of this leading in wire the
aerial wire proper, when it was held aloft by a kite or a balloon, was
to be secured.

As his assistants--Mr. Marconi always addressed them as Mr. Kemp and Mr.
Paget--were connecting up the instruments there was small show of
emotion though I could feel the high tension they were under and shared
it with them. Finally the apparatus was connected up and Mr. Marconi
tested out the adjustments.

Next we got out several big, nine-foot, hexagon-shaped kites whose ribs
were of bamboo and which were covered with silk soaked in _dope_ to make
it waterproof. These we put together and then from the wicker hamper we
took a couple of small silk balloons and filled them with hydrogen gas
from cylindrical steel tanks in which it was compressed.

At last on Tuesday, December 9th, we were all ready to hoist the aerial
wire with either a kite or a balloon, but the wind was still high and a
small blizzard was on. Mr. Marconi did not think it advisable to try to
make any tests then, and if we were disappointed what must he have been.
The next day the wind was still blowing strong but we were all anxious
to get to work.

“You may try putting up a kite when you are ready, Mr. Kemp,” Mr.
Marconi said.

Mr. Kemp was soon ready and with the help of a couple of natives--I was
one of them--he got the kite aloft. We used a stranded copper wire for
the kite string and this was also to serve for the aerial, but the
moment we had it well up a gust of wind hit the kite, the wire parted
and--we were ready to try again.

Mr. Marconi then suggested that we try one of the balloons. We took it
outside, fastened the aerial wire to it and, different from the kite, we
had no trouble in getting it to go up. No sooner had we let out all the
wire than it snapped again and the balloon sailed out to sea.

The next day the wind was just as high but we stuck to the barracks in
case it should go down. There were bits of talk among Mr. Marconi and
his assistants about the instruments, the ground, the aerial and other
things which would have been as Greek to any one but an old operator
like myself. I drank in every word that these pioneer wireless men said
but never a word said I. Once Mr. Paget asked me to hand him a dry-cell
and I handed him a binding post instead. Some one said “_stupid_” under
his breath but still loud enough for me to hear it and I was happy. None
of this _wireless kid_ stuff here. I was getting away with murder.

Mr. Paget looked at his watch. “Poldhu is sending now. Too bad we
haven’t a kite up, Mr. Marconi.”

“We must get it up. Mr. Kemp, will you be good enough to try again?” Mr.
Marconi said.

Oh-ho, said I to myself. I am in on big doings. What Mr. Marconi is here
for is not particularly to get signals from passing ships far out at
sea, but to try and get Poldhu! It made my hair stand on end at the
thought of such wonders. And if he gets it he will have spanned the
Atlantic--over 2,000 miles--with his wireless waves. He will have done
the biggest scientific thing since Cyrus Field joined the old and the
new worlds with his cable! Whoopee! Yow! Yow!

From that moment on I was walking on air. The inventor, whatever he may
have felt, was calm, cool and collected, dignified at all times but
always in a good humor. The strain he was undergoing must have been
tremendous, but he had trained himself well in the art of restraint and
no one, not _in on the know_ would have ever suspected it.

At Poldhu, on the Cornish coast of England, the _Marconi Company_ had
built, for the express purpose of making this greatest of all
experiments, the most powerful wireless station that had yet been put
up. It had been figured by Marconi and his technical adviser of England,
Dr. Fleming, that to transmit wireless messages across the ocean, 15
vertical wires 210 feet high, would have to be used and that these would
have to be energized by oscillating currents equal to about 25 horse
power. It was indeed a veritable lightning and thunder plant!

On Thursday, the 12th of December, we flew another kite and Mr. Marconi
came out and personally saw to it that no flukes were made. The wind was
still high and fitful, but with extreme care in which all of us,
including Mr. Marconi, took a hand we somehow got it up and held it at
about 400 feet.

Then the inventor and Mr. Kemp went into the wireless room. This was
about 11:30 o’clock in the morning, St. Johns time. We held the kite as
steady as we could and I knew that the supreme time in Marconi’s life
was at hand. After waiting half an hour--it seemed like an eternity of
time even to me--Mr. Kemp came out of the barracks and hurried over to
where we were holding the kite. I couldn’t tell from his face whether
the experiment had been a success or not, for an Englishman’s face
always looks the same.

“We got it!” he told Mr. Paget. “Mr. Marconi got the signal first and
then handed the head-phone to me. I heard the three dots several times
in succession quite clearly.”

The three dots forming the letter _S_ were those agreed upon by Mr.
Marconi and his operators at the Poldhu station before he left England,
as being the best signal to send out.

“Fine, old top,” exclaimed Mr. Paget, or words to that effect.

Mr. Kemp then went back to the barracks and in another half hour he
emerged again and told Mr. Paget that the signals were still coming in
and that there wasn’t the slightest doubt but that they came from
Poldhu. He said that Mr. Marconi had asked that the kite be kept up for
another hour if possible.

The wind grew more blustery than before, but anything was possible now
for nothing so makes for success as a little success. The aerial was
often more nearly horizontal than vertical, but Mr. Marconi got the
signals as they were flashed out by Poldhu just the same. This ended our
work for the day--that never-to-be-forgotten 12th of December.

The next day we flew the big kite using the aerial wire for a string
again, for Poldhu had been instructed to keep on sending the letter _S_.
The three short dots were sent out right along with short intervals
between them, but the kite would take a header every time it was hit by
a gust of wind and this would bring the aerial wire down so low the
signals could not be heard, and, again, the receiver had to be kept in
close adjustment.

After these last tests we hauled in the kite and then came the soft job
of packing up the stuff. While we were doing this I threw a bomb into
Mr. Marconi’s camp by telling Mr. Paget that I was Jack Heaton, the
former chief wireless officer on the _Andalusian_. He told Mr. Kemp and
they both smiled.

“Well, bless my heart, old man,” he said with about as much show of
emotion as I do now in repeating it to you. “I rather thought, don’t you
know, that you were as smart as paint--too smart to be trundling boxes
around on a bally goods wagon. Who told you to come up here?”

“No one, Mr. Kemp, I just wanted to work under Mr. Marconi so that I
could say I had done so and I came up from New York of my own accord.”

“Well, bless my old soul!” Mr. Kemp continued, which was his way of
expressing his opinion of the _nerve_ I had shown.

I kept right on packing up the stuff under the direction of the two
assistants and after a while when Mr. Marconi came over Mr. Kemp spoke
to him.

“I say, Mr. Marconi, this chap is Jack Heaton who was the operator on
the _Andalusian_ when she went down. He says he came up here to work
with you. I don’t know who took him on; I didn’t and Mr. Paget says he
didn’t.”

“Mr. Marconi, I’m mighty glad to meet you,” I said and held out my hand.

He grasped it firmly and shook it just once and that was worth another
million dollars. What’s that? Well, it was worth a hundred anyhow.

“Extraordinary,” said the great inventor as though this big word had but
two syllables in it. “_Quite_ extraordinary. I hope, Mr. Heaton, you
have not been disappointed.”

“I not only deeply appreciate the fact that I have been one of your
assistants, sir, but to have been present when you received the first
cableless signals across the Atlantic was an honor I never dreamed of.”

With his usual deliberateness the inventor did not immediately give to
the world at large the wonderful results of his transatlantic
experiments but waited for two whole days after he had completed his
tests. When he did finally make them known there was quite a conflict of
opinion, for some believed and others doubted that he had actually
received the signals from Poldhu.

Many of those who had followed wireless telegraphy from its beginnings
and knew somewhat of the theory of how it worked, set up a hue and a cry
that the signals he had received were sent by ships at sea, or else they
were due to _static_, as we call it now, that is, little charges of
atmospheric electricity which accumulates on the aerial wire and finally
discharges through the detector into the ground and this makes a click
in the head-phones that sounds like a dot.

When the equipment was packed up Mr. Kemp paid me off--not at the measly
rate of a truck driver or a roustabout in St. Johns, but an amount
considerably over that which a first-class operator gets and my expenses
for a round-voyage beside. I was soon headed once more for New York.

During the next two months Mr. Marconi’s critics were still carping
about the cableless signals. And then the inventor put a big one over on
them that made them crawl into their holes. In February, 1902, the s. s.
_Philadelphia_ sailed from England with the inventor on board. The
wireless receiver was of the regulation ship and shore type, that is, it
had a coherer and a Morse register, and it was nowhere nearly as
sensitive as the detector and telephone receivers used in the Poldhu
tests.

Mr. Marconi had arranged for the station at Poldhu to send messages
every day at certain times until the _Philadelphia_ arrived at New York.
He adjusted the ship’s receiver himself and from the time she left
England messages sent from the Poldhu station were printed on the tape
until the ship was 1,551 miles out and from that time on signals were
recorded on the tape up to 2,099 miles.

This time there was no possible chance for the doubting Thomases to say
that there might have been an error, for there were the records printed
in ink on a tape and not only Mr. Marconi but the officers of the ship
saw them, and the tape at different times was signed by the Captain.
Thus the last one read:

“Received on s. s. _Philadelphia_, Latitude 42, 1 N., Longitude 47, 23
W., distance 2,099 (two thousand and ninety-nine) statute miles from
Poldhu. Capt. A. R. Mills.”

This then was the beginning of sending messages across the ocean without
wires, or _cableless telegraphy_, as you call it, and I was in on it.

CHAPTER VII--A GOVERNMENT OPERATOR AT ARLINGTON

Nearly every one has the idea, or mania, or whatever you call it, of
making some kind of a collection. It often begins to show itself early
in a fellow’s life, and I’ve seen some old codgers in which it was still
going strong at seventy.

For instance, when I was only 10 or 12 years old I began to collect
postage stamps; mother started to collect trading stamps as soon as they
were invented; dad has a wonderful collection of old carbureters, which
ill-fated motorists had thrown away, and Messrs. Carnegie and
Rockefeller are still collecting the coin of the realm.

The pet collections of the ladies of my home town consisted chiefly of
souvenir spoons, china, pewter-ware and cut-glass while the men
collected autographs and books, bugs and butterflies, antiques and
paintings, fishing tackle and sporting guns. Then there was a sad-eyed
young man whose parents were poor, but dishonest, who got a notion he
would make a collection of all the solid silver water pitchers in and
adjacent to Montclair, but the police made him to part with his novel
collection and for the next five years he had ample time to collect his
scattered wits.

A few years after I had been with Mr. Marconi at St. Johns, when he
received the first signals flashed across the Atlantic, his and other
companies and various governments began to put up and to operate
gigantic cableless stations. It came to me that it would be a nice thing
to make a collection of all these big wireless plants. In thinking it
over, though, I had to admit there were a couple of obstacles in the way
which would make it a mighty hard proposition to carry through--and
these were: (1) I couldn’t get them all in our back-yard in Montclair,
and (2) I didn’t have the ready money to buy them.

The next best plan, I pictured in my mind’s eye, would be to make a two
foot scale model of each one of them and arrange them in a double row
like the mummies in the Metropolitan Art Museum. As this scheme too, I
figured, would take much time and money I compromised the matter by
promising myself that I would visit each station in turn as they were
put up and then in the end, I’d have a mental collection of them and
this, at least, wouldn’t take up any room nor would it cost very much.

After Marconi had received messages up to 1,551 miles and signals up to
2,099 miles at sea on a Morse register from his experimental station at
Poldhu the future of cableless telegraphy was an assured fact.

In 1902 stations of much greater power were put up at Poldhu, England,
and at Glace Bay on the Newfoundland Coast and at Wellfleet, Mass. When
the latter station was far enough along so that messages could be sent,
Colonel Roosevelt, who was then President of the United States was asked
to send King Edward VII the first cableless message across the Atlantic.
It read:

“His Majesty Edward VII, London, England. In taking advantage of the
wonderful triumph of scientific research and ingenuity which has been
achieved in perfecting a system of wireless telegraphy I extend on
behalf of the American people most cordial greetings and good wishes to
you and all the people of the British Empire. Theodore Roosevelt,
Wellfleet, Mass.”

As the new station at Poldhu was not in shape to send back the reply of
King Edward it had to be transmitted by cable and it read:

“The President, White House, Washington, America. I thank you most
sincerely for the kind message which I have just received from you by
transatlantic wireless telegraphy. I sincerely reciprocate in the name
of the people of the British Empire the cordial greetings and friendly
sentiments expressed by you on behalf of the American nation and I
heartily wish you and your country every possible prosperity. Edward R.
and I., Sandringham.”

That cableless telegraphy might be done on a commercial basis to the
best advantage the _Marconi Company_ decided to put up two new and more
powerful stations, one at Clifden on the coast of Ireland and a new one
at Glace Bay on this side of the Atlantic. When these stations were
finished the regular transmission of both private and public messages
across the Atlantic began in competition with the cable lines. The
exchange of cableless messages was kept up for ten months when the
station at Glace Bay burned down. Work on another station was started at
once, however, and new apparatus was built for it.

Again communication was set up between Glace Bay and Clifden, the first
messages being sent and received by the Postmasters General of England
and Canada.

Now while it was very hard for any one to get a pass to go inside the
cableless stations, even the directors of the _Marconi Company_ having
been denied that privilege, I went up to St. Johns the next summer for a
week’s vacation and, incidentally, to see the station at Glace Bay. I
felt pretty sure I should succeed for I knew one of the operators there.

The station is about three miles from the village of Glace Bay, on the
island of Cape Breton; it belongs to Nova Scotia but is separated from
it by the Strait of Canso. I didn’t have to ask where the station was
for four enormously high towers stood out before me like great
sentinels, imposing and mysterious and they can be seen for miles
around. I could also make out a dozen very high masts.

The entire station is built on rising ground nearly a hundred feet above
the level of the sea and below it lay the waters of big Glace Bay. Three
low buildings--at least they looked very low to me as I gaged them with
the height of the towers around them--are used for housing the
apparatus.

After being halted several times by watchmen picketed on the grounds I
finally got to the office and told the man in charge I wanted to see one
of the operators, Howard Brice, who, you will remember, was one of my
boon wireless chums of Montclair days.

We hadn’t seen each other since he and I became professional operators
and we had a regular old sea-captain’s time of it recounting our
experiences.

“Want to see the station, Jack?” he asked.

“Don’t mind if I do,” I replied in a don’t-give-a-care way.

The building we were in not only contained the office but a sound proof
room in which the receiving sets were placed. When we crossed the
threshold I was standing in a room where even the directors of the
company could not tread, not because they were, like angels, afraid, but
the men higher up were afraid to let them, for Marconi had a lot of
would-be rivals in those days especially on this side of the Atlantic.

The receivers were of the usual ship type, with magnetic detectors and
head-phones, and these were connected to the leading-in wire of the
aerial through switches and passed outside through insulators in the
wall. Several other wires connected to ordinary telegraph instruments
also passed through the wall.

“You see, Jack,” my guide said, “these lines belong to the _Western
Union_ and the _Canadian Pacific Railway Telegraph Company_ and by means
of them the transatlantic cableless messages are received for
transmission to England or are forwarded to their destination on the
Continent.”

This was all interesting enough but there wasn’t much to see. We went
over to another building which contained the power plant. In here a big
steam engine was running an alternating current generator.

“This generator develops 820 kilowatts, or about 1,100 horsepower, and,”
he continued, “this is the most powerful generator ever built for a
wireless transmitter.”

Again interesting but as far as I could see they looked just like any
other power plant. I sized them up just the same to see what I could
see.

“Now, let’s take a peep at the sending apparatus,” and with that we
strolled over to the third building.

“Sounds like a young thunder factory!” I ejaculated as crashes of
electric fire tore through the air like small bolts of lightning.

“If we’d had this station down there in Montclair we’d have had them all
by the ears, eh, Jack?”

“I’d say we would,” I returned as I measured with my eye the gigantic
high potential apparatus.

This was made up of low frequency transformers, revolving spark-gaps
which changed the high pressure alternating currents into high frequency
electricity. Then there were the high pressure oscillation transformers,
the condensers and switches of large size which were actuated by
telegraph sending keys. Yes, indeed, here were the real sights of a
cableless station and it was fully worth all that my round voyage cost
me to see it. Having feasted my eyes on this greatest of twentieth
century wonders to my heart’s content we went outside to get a
_close-up_ of the aerials.

“You see, Jack, we have two separate and distinct aerial wire systems.
The first, which is strung up between the four great towers is used only
for sending and the second which is suspended from the sticks is used
only for receiving. These latticed towers are built of wood and each one
is 410 feet high and together they form a square each side of which is
220 feet across.

“The sending aerial is formed of a large number of nearly parallel wires
all of them spread out at the top and coming together at the bottom like
an inverted pyramid. This aerial which has 60,000 feet of wire in it was
suspended from the tops of the towers. A leading-in wire is secured to
the ends of all the aerial wires where they come together at the bottom.
It leads, as you see,” he pointed to the side of the building, “into the
room through insulators where it is connected to the rotary spark-gap
through a closed circuit.

“These masts, or sticks, which are arranged in three rows, hold up the
receiving aerials. There are 18,000 feet of wire in it and it is made in
the shape of a fan with the handle pointing in the direction of Clifden
where our other station is located.”

Before leaving Howard told me that when he heard the _Marconi Company_
intended to build a pair of cableless stations it was his great ambition
to be one of the operators and in getting this position he had realized
it. For myself I preferred to go on making my collection of cableless
stations rather than to be planted up there at Glace Bay even though
this was one of the three places in the world where the overland
telegraph lines and transatlantic cableless meet and form a clearing
house for the news of two continents.

It was my intention to sail for Belfast, Ireland--all the big steamers
touch at that port on their way from New York to Liverpool--and go over
to Clifden to see the cableless station there. Before leaving, however,
I got it straight from Mr. Bottomley, who was the President of the
American _Marconi Company_, that it was built from the same plans as the
one at Glace Bay and that the apparatus was exactly the same, I
concluded not to bother adding it to my collection but to go to Paris
direct and get the Eiffel Tower station instead.

In this choice I was perhaps influenced somewhat by getting a job as
second wireless officer on the _Kronprinzessin Cecilie_, a fine fast
passenger express steamer of the _North German Lloyd Line_. This German
ship--as in fact all other transatlantic liners--was equipped with the
Marconi system and this grouched the German officers to the last limits
of despair. A little newspaper was published on board every day and, of
course, the news in it came _via_ wireless. Whenever we had trouble in
getting the messages from the stations at Wellfleet, Mass., or Poldhu,
England--as was always the case more or less when we were in
mid-ocean--the paper which the Germans ran printed them anyway just as
we took them down, and then they commented on what a rotten system
Marconi’s was.

The _Kronprinzessin Cecilie_ touched at Plymouth, England, and then
sailed across the English channel and touched again at Cherbourg,
France, where I threw up the job, as my destination was Paris, and I
arrived there a few hours later.

You know the Eiffel Tower was built in the midst of the ornamental park
of the Champ de Mars as the biggest attraction of the Paris Exposition
in 1885. When it was built wireless was an unknown means of
communication and when the Exposition was over there was much talk about
wrecking it, for it was not only useless but the Parisians thought it a
hideous object to be stuck up in a park.

But when Marconi showed the world how to send messages across the ocean,
and since one of the chief factors for long distance wireless
transmission was a high aerial, it didn’t take half-an-eye for the
_French War Department_ to see that the Eiffel Tower, which was very
nearly a thousand feet high, was just the thing to support an aerial.

Captain Ferrié, who had given much time to developing wireless apparatus
for the Army, was put in charge of installing a small plant of about 15
horsepower simply to see what could be done with it. This experimental
plant at once proved very useful in sending out time signals and weather
reports to ships at sea and for the Navy Department to issue orders to
Naval Commanders, but its greatest value was shown during the Moroccan
troubles when the War Department was able to keep in direct touch with
the Army there through its station at Casablanca.

The need of a new, permanent, high-powered station was strongly felt and
work was commenced on it in 1908. Now instead of a couple of makeshift
shacks at the base of the tower a concrete building was put in under the
ground so that its roof was on a level with the surface of the park.
This was done in order that a clear view across the grounds could be had
and also to prevent the noise of the sparks from being heard in the
neighborhood, which would not only be disturbing, but, what mattered
more, any one who knew the Morse code could read all the outgoing
messages a block away.

When I got settled in Paris I struck out to see the Eiffel Tower
station. I found it was just about to be opened and it was my intention
to try to get a job there for I believed it would be the only way I’d
ever get to see the installation.

I asked a _gendarme_, as they call an armed policeman over there, who
was standing hard by, where the office of the wireless station might
happen to be--that is, I asked him in the deaf and dumb alphabet, and I
gathered from the motions he made with his hands and arms that it was in
the underground building. I hied me down the stairs and found myself in
a small, central area-way from which doors around it opened into the
office, receiving, dynamo and sending rooms.

Not being able to read French, as I explained to some officials
afterward, I had carelessly opened the door on which the sign read
_Bureau de Transmitteur_ instead of _Bureau de Telegraphie sans Fil_
with the result that I saw the whole blooming sending apparatus. There
were two operators in charge but they didn’t think I was worth noticing.

The sending apparatus was very much the same as that I saw in the
cableless station at Glace Bay. This is easily explained because there
is only one way to change a large amount of low pressure electricity
such as is generated by an alternating current dynamo into high
potential, high frequency electricity and that way is to use a
transformer to _step up_ the pressure of the alternating current;
condensers are then charged with the latter current and this in turn is
discharged between a pair of spark balls, or a rotary spark-gap which is
used for the same purpose.

Not having been thrown out of the sending room and having seen all there
was to see I opened the door to the _Bureau de Recepteur_ and took a
good look at the receiving apparatus. The detectors were of the
_electrolytic_ type, each of the cups which contained the solution
having three wires sealed in it instead of one; this was the invention
of Prof. Branly of Paris who got up the _coherer_ several years before
Marconi began his experiments in wireless.

The door of the _Installation d’Alimentation Electrique_ was open and I
glanced in at the dynamos, motors and storage batteries and from the
size of its equipment I judged the station to be about 100 horsepower.
Having seen it all I opened the door of the _Bureau de Telegraphie sans
Fil_ and walked in just as we do in offices over here.

Somebody must have told the _Directeur_, or _manager_ as we would call
him in good old English, that I was coming for before I could explain in
sign language that I wanted a job he, with the aid of a couple of other
conspirators, hustled me unceremoniously out, up the stairs and on to
the green grass of the park. No, it wasn’t exactly a case of _sour
grapes_ but after I had seen the apparatus of the station and added it
to my Christian Science collection I didn’t want the job anyway.

The most interesting feature of the Eiffel Tower wireless station is its
aerial and before I left I studied it carefully. It is a one-sided
affair, but this is not because its designer thought well of it but in
virtue of the fact that the Eiffel Tower sets at one end of the Champ de
Mars.

If the tower had been built in the middle of the park the wires could
have been brought down all around it on all sides thus forming what is
called an _umbrella aerial_ and this would have been _good practise_, as
the engineers say. As it is there are six steel cables about ½ an inch
in diameter secured to but insulated from the top of the tower on one
side and these are guyed out in the shape of a fan and anchored at the
other end of the park.

The cables are set in stone posts which project above the ground and to
prevent simple folks from laying their hands on them, in which case
their bodies would become conductors and allow a few million volts of
high potential electricity to pass through them, the posts are
surrounded by iron fences. The main cables are connected together about
half-way between the ground and the top of the tower with other and
lighter cables and these are joined to a single leading-in cable which
runs down to and passes through a window to the top of the area-way in
the underground building.

Finally the leading-in cable is connected to one end of a tuning coil,
the other end of which is joined to a _ground_ formed of metal plates
having nearly 3000 square feet of surface and these are buried deeply in
the earth far below the underground building.

Before I left the States to get the Eiffel Tower station the Navy
Department had contracted with the _National Signaling Company_, an
American wireless telegraph concern, for the most powerful cableless
plant that had yet been built.

While I was in France work had been started on the towers and buildings
at Arlington on the Potomac River near Washington and the machinery and
apparatus for it was being built. After my return, with some jockeying,
I landed a position with the _National Signaling Company_ in the testing
department and so had the opportunity of watching the whole installation
grow up of which I shall tell you presently.

Finally when every piece of apparatus had been built and given
exhaustive tests the equipment was shipped to Arlington, or, as some
would-be high-brow tried to rename it, Radio, and the engineers and
working force of the Company were sent to Arlington to install it, get
it into working order and make the final tests required by the
Government before the latter took it over.

When we reached Washington I could see the three great steel towers at
Arlington looming up as high, it seemed to me, as the Washington
Monument itself. On reaching the Arlington station which sets on the
crest of a hill in a corner of the Fort Myer Reservation, the towers did
not look so high, nor were they, for the tallest one was about 600 feet
and the two shorter ones were 450 feet high. These three towers formed a
triangle, the distance between the two shorter ones being 350 feet, and
450 feet between the taller and shorter ones. These towers, which were
complete and ready for the aerials, rested on concrete buses and were
insulated from the ground by slabs of marble. There are three buildings
and these were also ready for the installation.

Now while the machinery and apparatus were being moved into the
buildings and set in place a force of men was put to work on assembling
the aerials and swinging them between the tops of the towers. These
aerials are known as T, or flat-top aerials and right here I want to
tell you how and why this type of aerial came to be.

In the early days Marconi, and those who followed him, thought that a
high vertical wire, that is, one sticking straight up in the air, was
all that was needed to get distance. On ships the masts are never very
high and so the late Lieutenant Hudgens of the U. S. Navy tried
stringing the wires of the aerial down to the bow and stern of the
battleship _Kearsarge_ to give the wires a greater length. This sloping
aerial gave so much better results than the straight, or vertical aerial
that he then suspended the wires _between_ the top of the masts of the
ship and, lo-and-behold, it worked even better than before and thus it
was that the T, or flat-top aerial came to be.

To get the best results the aerials of two stations communicating with
each other should both be vertical or flat-top, that is, a vertical wire
will not receive from a flat-top nearly as well as from another one that
is vertical and this is just as true the other way about. As all ships
are fitted with flat-top aerials and as the Eiffel Tower aerial is
neither the one kind nor the other but a sloping aerial and hence would
receive from a flat-top as well as from a vertical aerial the Navy
Department decided to use the T or flat-top aerial on the Arlington
station.

We assembled, tested and put up the three flat-top aerials between the
towers and connected them together so that in effect a single long
aerial was formed. Porcelain insulators of the kind on which high
tension power transmission lines are carried are used to insulate the
aerials from the towers. The leading-in cable runs from the aerials to
which it is connected down to the operating room through a copper tube
set in a glass window.

The ground is formed of copper wires buried deeply in the earth and
radiating in every direction from the station. This network of wires
extends over, I should say, ten acres, and this, of course, makes a very
good ground.

The current for energizing the sending apparatus is taken from the lines
of the _Potomac Light and Power Company_; this runs an electric motor of
200 horse power which in turn drives a 100 kilowatt alternating current
generator; the current from the latter flows through a transformer which
raises the pressure of it to 25,000 volts. Next a battery of _compressed
air condensers_ are charged with this high voltage current and this is
discharged by a rotating spark-gap. This spark-gap has a wheel, on the
rim of which is set a number of metal points, or _electrodes_ as they
are called, and around them are an equal number of fixed metal points or
electrodes.

When the wheel revolves sparks are made only when the electrodes on the
wheel and those that are fixed around it are exactly in a line. Now
instead of a few big sparks taking place every second, a thousand
smaller ones occur in a second and this makes a whistling sound which is
heard by the operator who is _listening in_ at the distant station. The
high frequency currents set up by the spark-gap then surge through an
_oscillation transformer_ which increases its pressure and finally into
and through the aerial wire system where they are damped out in long
electric waves.

The Morse telegraph key is placed in the receiving room and it works a
_control switch_ in the sending room. The control switch breaks up the
current that flows from the generator into the transformer into dots and
dashes.

The receiving instruments have both _electrolytic_ and _crystal
detectors_, the other parts being made up of the usual variable
condensers, tuning coils and oscillation transformer and head-phones.

Well, at last everything was all ready for the final company test and I
was mighty glad of it for things were getting very much on my nerves. A
cableless station is altogether too big and cold-blooded a proposition
for a fellow who likes a little excitement once in a while.

The Navy Department had fitted out the cruiser _Salem_ with a sending
and a receiving apparatus exactly like that of the Arlington station
except it was very much smaller.

On February 13, 1913, the _Salem_ sailed from the League Island Navy
Yard at the mouth of the Delaware River for the Mediterranean Sea so
that the official tests of the Arlington station could be made. The
letter _D_ was used for the test signals and we sent these out from
Arlington for 15 minutes each time before the messages were transmitted.

Officials from the Navy Department gave us the messages to send and we
were allowed under the terms of the contract to repeat each message
three times to make sure the _Salem_ got it, but no more. The _Salem_
then followed by sending the test signal _D_ and after this she sent
four messages which the Captain gave her operators. This exchange of
signals and messages was made twice a day throughout the _Salem’s_
voyage across.

The messages we sent from Arlington were received by the _Salem_ up to a
distance of 2,375 miles, while the messages sent by the operators on the
_Salem_ were received by Arlington up to a distance of 1,000 miles. Far
greater distances were covered by both the shore and ship stations but
they were not accurate enough to meet the conditions called for by the
Navy Department.

At night when the ether is quiet, as is always the case, the messages
from both stations were sent and received over greater distances than by
day and we were able to read what the _Salem_ sent when she was out
1,600 miles and her operators got us up to 3,200 miles. Even when the
_Salem_ reached Gibraltar she could get Arlington’s signals but they
were so feeble she could not take down our messages.

The National Signaling Company having successfully completed the tests
imposed by its contract with the Government now formally turned
Arlington station over to the Navy Department and having added that
great station to my collection I was ready to get back to the big town.

CHAPTER VIII--ABOARD A WARSHIP AT VERA CRUZ

Trouble was brewing down in Mexico. Did I say _was_ brewing? Well, what
I should have said is that it _had_ brewed, and will keep on brewing
until Uncle Sam goes down there and cleans out Villa and all the other
bandits and revolutionists.

You say the _Monroe Doctrine_ won’t permit it? Now there you’ve got the
best of me; I have a very hazy idea of what the _Monroe Doctrine_ means
but I’ve had occasion to observe that whenever a country can’t govern
itself or the ruler of some country wants to govern the whole world
Uncle Sam just naturally drives a gun carriage through the _Monroe
Doctrine_ and settles the affair to everybody’s satisfaction once and
for all. He is very like a school teacher who is so much annoyed by a
couple of his pupils that are constantly arguing and fighting he finally
gets mad himself and licks both of them and then things quiet down and
become decent like.

Getting down to cases, though, what I mean is that trouble was brewing
between Mexico and the United States. The Mexicans had been fighting a
long time among themselves; Madero who had been president of the
republic was shot and killed; Huerta, an Indian of Aztec stock, was
president at that time and he carried things on with a high hand, while
Carranza, a rebel who wanted to be president, was, with the aid of Villa
and other revolutionists, doing his best to wrest the government from
him.

Your Uncle Sam thought about as much of President Huerta as he thinks
now of the bandit Villa and would not recognize him as the head of the
Mexican Government. His attitude naturally made Huerta very sore on the
United States and, as I remarked before, trouble was brewing, for Huerta
had been doing small, contemptible things to aggravate the United States
and now he pulled off another low down trick.

It came about like this: in April, 1914, the U. S. S. _Dolphin_ anchored
in the bay of Tampico, Mexico, and the paymaster of the ship and some
marines went over to town in a launch. Their object in going ashore was
to buy some gasoline but before they had gone very far a number of
Huerta’s Mexican soldiers arrested them, led them through the streets
with a howling mob of _greasers_ after them and then threw them into
jail.

Rear Admiral Mayo of the _Dolphin_ soon learned of the predicament of
his men and demanded of the Commander of the Mexican army to set them
free immediately, if not sooner. The Commander, knowing full well what
would happen if he tried to hold the marines, let them go and apologized
for the _mistake_, as he called it.

But the Admiral was not the kind of an officer to let the Army or any
other branch of the Mexican Government insult our men and get away with
it. He therefore avowed that the Huerta government should salute our
flag by firing guns and that this must be done on or before a certain
hour.

In the meantime the Admiral communicated the incident to our government
at Washington and this was done by sending wireless messages from his
flagship to our Darien wireless station at Camento, Panama, and from
there it was retransmitted to Arlington. The Darien station which had
been completed only a little while before, has a sending apparatus equal
in power to the Arlington station but it can send and receive farther
than the latter station because all three of its towers are 600 feet
high.

Mr. Bryan, who was then Secretary-of-State, got in touch with Mr.
O’Shaughnessy, the U. S. _chargé d’affaires_ in Mexico City, and he took
up the matter with President Huerta. The erstwhile President of Mexico
also apologized profusely, believing that he could in this way get out
of saluting our flag. Our government insisted that apologies were not
enough but that the Mexican Government must salute our flag as Rear
Admiral Mayo had ordered, and this Huerta finally agreed to do.

Knowing the Mexican disposition, whose watchword is _mañana_ (which
means _to-morrow_), and having every reason to believe that there would
be a hitch in the proceedings, the Admiral extended the time in which
the salute was to be given to May 12.

As before, the 12th went by and the New York papers stated that Huerta
had failed in his promise to salute the flag. I _doped_ it out that
there would be big _doings_ down there and, unlike the _greasers_, I did
not let _mañana_ interfere with my patriotic obligations to Uncle Sam,
but I went right over to a recruiting station on 23rd Street and
enlisted in the Navy as an “electrician for wireless telegraphy.”

At that time a man who wanted to enlist in the Navy as a wireless
operator had to have “a working knowledge of telephones, measuring
instruments, call bells, etc., and he must be able to connect up same to
batteries and make minor repairs to them.” Also “familiarity with
ordinary telegraph instruments while an aid in acquiring a working
knowledge of wireless telegraph instruments, is not an essential
qualification for enlistment as a wireless telegraph operator.”

This is what the enlistment circular I was given to read said but, of
course, it was meant for men who knew a little about electricity and
nothing about wireless telegraphy to start with. But here I was a full
fledged operator, who had worked with Marconi and had helped to install
the equipment in the Arlington station!

The circular went on to say that “applicants would be enlisted as
_electricians, third class_, at $30 per month.” Some come-down for a man
who had been a _first wireless officer_ on a transatlantic liner and who
had earned, at least on one round voyage, $200 a month, to say nothing
of one who had worked with Marconi!

As I read on, the circular further stated “that men detailed as
operators will be eligible to be promoted to higher ratings when they
qualify as operators and have served the required probationary time
under the regulations through the successive grades to chief
electricians at $60 per month when they prove their ability to take
charge of the wireless telegraph station and interior communication on
board ship and have been assigned to duty.”

A man who knew nothing about wireless but wanted to become an operator
was given a course of instruction at some naval wireless school or
wireless telegraph shore station and when he was proficient enough he
was assigned to a cruising ship either in charge of a station or else as
an assistant to the electrician in charge.

As expert wireless operators were always in demand in the Navy I was at
once assigned to the _Alabama_ as an assistant operator and it was not
long before I was rated as a first class electrician.

I joined the _Alabama_ over at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, at New York,
where she had been in dry-dock undergoing repairs and the next day we
rode down the East River, through New York Bay and out to sea where we
joined the North Atlantic Fleet under the command of Rear-Admiral
Fletcher.

Surely enough, we got the news from Arlington on the 18th that Huerta
had put off saluting the flag though still agreeing he would do so;
President Wilson was heartily tired of it all and he finally sent an
_ultimatum_ to the sly old fox at Mexico City. This was to the effect
that if he did not salute the flag by 6 o’clock of the afternoon of the
19th he (President Wilson) would ask Congress the next day to permit him
to send the army and navy to Mexico to force him (Huerta) to do so.

To see that this was done on schedule time we received orders by
wireless to sail on the 14th to Mexico. The _North Atlantic Fleet_ was
formed of some thirty-six warships, and these were manned by no less
than 15,000 blue jackets and marines.

We were soon heading south. Talk about cleaning up Mexico! Why, we had a
fleet that could have cleaned up the world, and a mighty pretty sight
did she make, too. When we got there the fleet was split up into two
squadrons, one going to Tampico and the other, to which the _Alabama_
belonged, going to Vera Cruz, the Atlantic port nearest to Mexico City.

From what I gathered from the officers the purpose of President Wilson
was not to make war on poor old war-ridden, moth-eaten Mexico, but
simply to blockade the ports of Tampico and Vera Cruz and take over
their customs houses until such time as Huerta could see the necessity
of ordering the Commander of the Mexican Army to salute.

Two days later when we were steaming at full speed for Mexican waters, I
caught the message that Huerta had again agreed to salute and since he
knew we were coming I believed that he would do it this time sure and
that our next orders would be to steam to northern waters. I was out of
luck, that’s all. But we kept right on going just the same.

What Huerta really said was that if his Army fired the salute it would
be right, he thought, for our Navy to salute in turn. Huerta was
informed that this was always the custom when salutes of this kind were
fired and that our Navy would, of course, return it.

We learned by wireless the next day that Huerta had again flopped over
and he now wanted the salute to be fired gun for gun, that is, his army
would fire the first gun, then our fleet would fire the next one and so
on. Not only this but he wanted President Wilson to sign some kind of a
paper and tied the whole proceedings in a hard knot with a lot of other
strings. These conditions which Huerta wanted to impose President Wilson
would not agree to and there was nothing else left for him to do but to
back the ultimatum on the day he said he would.

On the way down I had plenty of time to look over the _Alabama_, to get
acquainted with the men and to get my bearings. I can’t tell you here
the little things that happened on board but I must say a word about the
_Alabama_.

The battleship, in her day, was the giant of all the sea-fighting craft
and her _armor_, that is, the steel covering that protects her, is a
great piece of work. First of all the whole main deck is made of thick
sheets of steel called _armor plate_ and this covers the ship from her
stem to stern-post just above the water line.

The part of a battleship where a shell hitting her would likely do the
most damage is at her water-line and if a shell should hit there and
explode it might tear out a big hole when she would quickly fill with
water and sink. To prevent this from happening a very thick band of
steel armor plate is riveted all the way round her at the water-line.

All the machinery and equipment of the ship including her engines,
boilers and machinery, the powder magazines and shell rooms, the
passageways through which the ammunition is taken, the wireless room, in
fact everything except her guns, is in the hold below this strong deck.
Of course there must be some openings in this deck but these are
protected by gratings of heavy steel, the bars of which set closely
enough together to keep fragments of shells from going through should
one hit and explode on deck.

On our battleships the main battery is generally made up of four 10
inch, 12 inch or 13 inch breech loading guns and these are mounted in
revolving turrets one of which is forward and one aft. The _Alabama_ had
four 13 inch guns in the large turrets and twelve 6 inch guns on the
broadsides. I’m telling you that if Huerta had been at Vera Cruz when we
got there and taken a look into the muzzle of one of our 13 inch guns
he’d have saluted the flag without any more of that mañana business. As
it was he was safely out of range of our guns for Mexico City is over
200 miles from Vera Cruz.

In the early days of wireless when every Tom, Dick and Harry was getting
up a “new” wireless system the _Navy Department_ tried out all of them.
It would not use the Marconi system because the government wanted to buy
the apparatus outright while the policy of the _Marconi Company_ was to
lease their apparatus.

The favorite type of wireless apparatus used by the _Navy Department_
was known as the _Telefunken_, a German getup that was a combination of
the Slaby-Arco and the Braun-Siemens and Halske systems. The transmitter
of our station was one of this kind and consisted of an induction coil
with a mercury turbine interruptor, an electric motor to run it and the
usual key, loose coupled tuning coil and condensers.

The receiver was of a later type and had both a _crystal detector_ and a
_vacuum tube detector_, the latter being the invention of Dr. Fleming of
England who has been Marconi’s technical adviser for many years. This
detector is really a small incandescent lamp bulb with not only a
filament but a metal plate sealed in it. The filament is kept at a white
heat by a current from a storage battery.

When the telephone receivers are connected to the hot filament and the
cold plate electrodes, the high frequency currents that are set up in
the aerial by the incoming electric waves are changed into direct
currents and the varying strength of these act on the head-phones. This
detector is very sensitive and needs no adjusting.

Many of the messages we sent and received were in straight English but
nearly all the important ones, especially those for and from Washington,
were in code, the purpose of which was to prevent any one else, except
our officers, from reading them and this kind of message is not very
interesting but we know that something is going on anyway.

We anchored off Vera Cruz on the 21st and the natives must have thought
from the number of warships that hemmed them in that we were going to
blow them to smithereens. A few hours after our arrival we landed a
thousand marines and they drove back Huerta’s soldiers and captured the
customs house.

The chief reason this was done was because our government had got wise
to the fact that a couple of German ships were scheduled to arrive at
Vera Cruz with a cargo of guns and ammunition for Huerta, and our
Commander had received orders on the way down to prevent this by seizing
the customs house.

There was not much show of armed resistance on the part of Huerta’s men
but in the scuffle that took place four of our men were killed and about
twenty were wounded. I made up my mind right then and there that if I
ever got a chance I’d blow the sombrero off of some greaser out of pure
revenge.

The favorite method of warfare that is waged by the Mexicans is
_sniping_, that is, they hide behind something and take a shot now and
then at you. As a result of sniping a few days later the number of our
men that had been killed was brought up to eighteen and the number of
wounded to 71.

When things had quieted down Hart Douglas, another operator and I got a
six hour shore leave. We buckled on our holsters and slipped our
revolvers into them with small thought of having a chance to use them.
We took a look around the town and all went well for awhile when _zip,
zip_, a couple of bullets whizzed by my ear and Hart dropped with a
bullet in his lung.

I whipped out my gun and wheeled around just in time to spot a couple of
snipers lying on a near-by roof with their rifles pointing toward us. I
emptied the five chambers at them as fast as I could pull the trigger. I
got one of them; he raised himself to his feet and pitched headlong into
the street. But the other one got me for he drew a bead on my gun arm
which, also don’t forget, is my key arm. A couple of marines put poor
Hart on a stretcher and carried him over to a field hospital. Another
bound up my arm, walked with me over to the launch and when I got aboard
my ship the doctor dressed it.

[Illustration: “I WHIPPED OUT MY GUN JUST IN TIME TO SPOT A COUPLE
OF SNIPERS”]

No more shore leaves were granted the men because two perfectly good
operators had gone ashore and two miserable good-for-nothing operators
had returned. Hart hovered between life and death for weeks but he
finally pulled through though he never will be as good a man as he was.
I came along all right but my hand seemed paralyzed from the wrist down
and it was many a moon before I could use a key again with my right
hand. I guess you see now why I like those greasers so well.

Our marines remained on duty until the end of the month when General
Funston arrived from Galveston with about four thousand troops and took
possession of the port. It was hard to see what turn affairs would take
next for Huerta had an army of 5,000 men not very far from Vera Cruz.
But I guess he had heard of General Funston before and he didn’t care
about being captured as Aguinaldo, the Philippine leader, was.

Instead of having some small war the diplomats of the A B C governments
of South America, as Argentine, Brazil and Chile are called, offered to
try to negotiate a friendly settlement between the United States and
Mexico. President Wilson, who liked peace and hated war, at once
accepted their kind offer and agreed to send representatives to their
proposed conference. The following day Huerta agreed to send his
representatives to the A B C conference which was to be held in the town
of Niagara Falls on the Canadian side of the river.

Finally, when all the representatives met, the first thing that was done
was to have an armistice signed by the United States and Huerta’s
government. As soon as this was done Huerta’s representatives tried to
have the United States withdraw its forces from Vera Cruz and the United
States forego the salute for the insult to our flag. The representatives
of the United States asked only that Huerta resign.

After deliberating for five weeks the representatives of all the
countries agreed that a provisional government should be established in
Mexico, and that Huerta should resign; that the United States should not
ask Mexico to pay an indemnity nor to ask for a salute or other apology
for the insult to the flag at Tampico and that our troops were to remain
at Vera Cruz.

In the meantime Huerta was being hard pressed by Carranza on the north
and the rebel Zapata on the south and with our troops occupying Vera
Cruz it evidently suited him very well to resign. So on the 10th of July
Huerta appointed Chief Justice Corbajol to be president in his place.

It was common talk among the blue-jackets on our ship that Huerta had
some 3,000,000 dollars deposited in banks somewhere in Europe and that
he planned to go there. Be that as it may he handed in his resignation
to the Chamber of Deputies a week later and left for Puerto, Mexico, on
a special train under heavy guard. From there he sailed for Jamaica and
thence for Europe.

Thus it was that Huerta, the Indian descendant of the Aztecs, who always
went one way and came back another, got out of saluting our flag and
probably saved his life.

CHAPTER IX--ON A SUBMARINE CHASER

Very shortly after Huerta resigned the presidency of Mexico and made his
get-away, the ex-Kaiser let loose the war-dogs of Europe and here I was
signed up for four years in the Navy and, I figured, didn’t stand a
ghost of a chance of breaking into the fight. It seemed to me a pretty
tough deal that old Huerta could resign his job while I, a free American
citizen, couldn’t quit, resign, go-over-the-hill, or anything.

What I wanted to do was to get over to England and _sign up_ there for
it was dollars to doughnuts in my mind that there would be some small
bickerings going on between the British and the German navies and it
would be well worth while to see those big guns get into action. I
hadn’t the remotest idea, then, that the _Imperial German Navy_, as
those _boches_ so loved to call it, would be afraid to come out in the
offing and put up a fight. But when it came to torpedoing unarmed
passenger ships loaded with women and children, or hospital ships
carrying wounded soldiers they were right there Fritzy-on-the-spot with
their _blackheads_ as they called their Whitehead torpedoes.

While the ex-Kaiser’s navy could not be induced to leave its
mine-protected harbors and do battle with the British fleet--no, not
even if all Germany starved to death--crafty, old Admiral von Tirpitz
began to build up a frightful fleet of U-boats with the avowed intention
of sinking every merchant ship, no matter what flag she flew, if she
carried foods or munitions to England and her Allies.

As the United States was shipping cargoes of both of these commodities
to Great Britain and France, which was entirely within her rights
according to international law, it was not long, as you can imagine,
before the German U-boats were sinking our ships and killing our men.

It was bewhiskered Admiral von Tirpitz who figured out and showed the
ex-Kaiser that the only way left open for Germany to win the war was to
sink every ship afloat that did not fly the German flag, and soon after
this program was agreed to by the war-lords they seemed in a fair way to
succeed, for they were sinking ships faster than the Allies and the
United States could replace them.

Any number of schemes to beat the U-boats were thought up and while most
of them were quite impracticable there were a few that proved effective
when put to the test. One way was to build more merchant ships every
month than the U-boats could sink and when Uncle Sam put the job into
Mr. Schwab’s hands this was done. Another plan was to hunt down the
U-boats with _submarine chasers_. A submarine chaser is a small,
high-speed boat carrying one or more rapid fire guns.

As you know a submarine can shoot a torpedo at the biggest ship afloat
and if it hits her she is sure to sink in a few minutes and yet it is
the easiest thing in the world to send a U-boat to the bottom if you can
only get a chance to land a shell on her.

Just before we got into the war Germany built two great submarines each
of which was over 300 feet long. One of these U-boats was the
_Deutschland_ and the other was the _U-53_, and both had a cruising
radius of about 5,000 miles, that is, they could travel that distance
without having to take on food or fuel.

No one here ever thought that a submarine could make a trip across the
ocean but the _Deutschland_ did it. She left Bremen, Germany, and
submerged while in the river, then she slipped out into the seaway under
the British fleet that had the German warships bottled up, made the
passage of the North Sea on and under the water, thence through the
English Channel going this dangerous route entirely under water and
across the Atlantic Ocean during which she submerged only when she saw
some of the Allies’ warships.

Then one fine morning, 16 days later, she came to the surface in
Chesapeake Bay and docked at Baltimore. There she unloaded a cargo of
dye-stuffs and synthetic gems and took on a cargo of rubber, and, what
was of more importance, secret papers which Count von Bernsdorf,
Germany’s ambassador to the United States, could not trust to go any
other way. On sailing she made her way to the mouth of the bay,
submerged to escape the British ships which were laying in wait for her
beyond the three mile limit and returned to her home port. Later on she
made another round voyage with equal success.

When we got into the war it was clear that we had a _war-zone_ right
here at home and one that was not to be sneezed at, for, since a
submarine could be built large enough to travel the whole distance from
Europe to America without having to be convoyed by a base, or
_mother-ship_ as she is called, Germany could as easily send over to our
shores one or a dozen submarines as large as the _Deutschland_, fitted
out with rapid-fire guns and torpedoes and do a lot of damage to our
shipping and even to our cities. The _Navy Department_ believed that the
best way to protect our coast was to build a large fleet of U-boat
chasers and this work was gone ahead with as fast as possible.

Now while I can use a key with my left hand nearly as well as I could
with my right, still my arm pained me a good deal and I could have
gotten a long leave of absence if I had asked for it. So when I told the
commander I wanted to be transferred to a U-boat chaser he fixed it O.
K. for me and I was assigned to the _Second_ _Naval District_ which
patrolled from Newport to the First and Third Naval Districts.

The chaser I was assigned to was a brand-new one just off the ways and
of the very latest type; she had a length of 110 feet, a beam a little
under 15 feet and a draft of about 4 feet. She was built chiefly of wood
but she had a pair of steel masts and a crow’s nest for the _lookout_
whose job it was to watch for U-boats. She was powered with a steam
engine but instead of coal she burned oil under her boilers. Her large
size made her very speedy and she could do 25 knots, if she had to,
which was twice as fast as the fastest U-boat could do.

The aerial was stretched between her masts and the leading-in wire was
connected to it near the rear mast and followed it down to the deck
where it passed through an insulator in the latter, and on into the
operating room. This was about the smallest space I ever got into which
was graced by the name of an operating room but I had no _kick_ coming
as we were not afloat all the time.

The sending set had a ½ kilowatt transformer and the receiving set was
fitted with both crystal and vacuum detectors; the whole space taken up
by them was probably not more than 5 cubic feet. Well, so much for the
chaser.

There were only 14 men in our crew and there was far less formality on
board than on a battleship. Bill Adams and I got to be pretty good pals.
The first time I met him he was trying out one of her Hotchkiss
semi-automatic guns and I was watching him.

“Where did you get that chunk of mud?” he queried as he pointed the gun
at an imaginary U-boat.

“Speaking to me?” I asked in turn.

“You said it,” he replied bluntly.

“If you refer to the sparkler on my annularis finger I have to inform
you, sir, that it came from the land of the Raripunas about 1500 miles
up the Amazon river,” I explained with great perspicacity.

You see, I had had the diamonds cut that Princess Mabel gave me and the
one I wore was a _regent_ weighing about 2 carats and it was mounted in
a Tiffany setting. In fact it was altogether too big a diamond for any
ordinary blue-jacket to come by honestly.

“That’s where it came from, but I’m askin’ you, as man to man now, where
did _you_ get it?”

“Right where it came from,” I put it straight back to him.

If it hadn’t been for my _game_ arm I guess Bill and I would have
settled the mooted question as to where my _chunk of mud_ came from by
referring it to the court of last resort, by which I mean the manly art
of _hit-’em-again, gob_.

“Put up your dukes,” commanded Bill at the same time striking an
attitude of a gas-house slugger.

Now to get my right hand up I had to lift it with my left and when Bill
saw this he yelled, “time, you win!”

Then his eyes softened, his voice lost its harshness and he became
sympathetic. He wanted to know how it happened and all about it. And
then we got the matter of the chunk of mud straightened out to Bill’s
satisfaction. From that time on Bill and I were pals and we used to swap
stories. He had been in every corner on the face of the earth except
South America and his stock of experiences was a large one. To keep even
with him I had to manufacture tales out of raw material as I went along
and I often thought he did the same thing. Say, he certainly put over
some regular crawlers. He never got tired of talking about the prospects
of mining diamonds in Brazil and all I had to do to get him going was to
flash my sparkler on him and he was transported as if by magic to
equatorial South America.

Like dozens of other fellows I have met, Bill was a strange
contradiction of brains in that he was a natural born hard boiled egg
and yet when a fellow needed a friend he was as compassionate as a
Salvation Army lass in a trench under fire; again he was ignorant, yet
wanted to learn. For instance he wanted me to teach him wireless; it was
all vague and intangible to him. He had to have something he could see
in three dimensions instead of having to visualize it in his mind; his
one big talent lay in his being able to hit a target with a projectile
of small or large size and accordingly he was able to serve his Uncle
Sam nobly and with telling effect.

You may or may not know it but a fellow can join the navy and live
aboard ship a long time and still know but very little about any part of
her, except his own particular branch, unless he keeps his eyes and ears
open and talks with fellows who know and can and will answer his
questions intelligently. Bill was ignorant when it came to book-learning
but he knew all about submarines and submarine chasers from their
bottoms up.

I had asked him why it was that a torpedo from a U-boat couldn’t hit a
submarine chaser and also to tell me something about the fighting
qualities of U-boats.

“You see, matey,” explained Bill wisely, “the torpedoes made for the
Kaiser’s U-boats are adjusted so that after they are shot from their
tubes they run through the water at an even depth of between 8 and 9
feet below the surface. Now a boat of any size draws far more water than
this and, of course, if the torpedo hits her at all it will be below the
water line and she goes down. But this chaser of ours draws only 4 feet
of water and so a torpedo, if it behaves itself, would pass clean under
her and never touch her.

“The trouble is,” he went on, “that there never was a torpedo made that
stuck to its course and it is liable to shift to the port or starboard
or to come to the surface and for this reason we never take a chance but
dodge them. You can always tell when a torpedo is coming by the thin
white wake she makes on top of the water and while a ship can’t get out
of its way, a speedy little boat like ours can make a quick turn and
give it a wide berth.”

“Who got up the idea of a submarine chaser?”

“Well, that I don’t know about, matey, but I do know that when Germany
sent out her first U-boats to the coast of Great Britain to sink her
ships, all sorts of motor boats which had a length of 40 feet and over
were pressed into service; these boats had guns mounted in them and they
combed the sea in search of the submarine enemy.

“The first German U-boats were slow old craft and they stuck close to
the coast where the ships were the thickest. This made it easy for the
British armed motor-boat patrols to hunt them out and send them to the
bottom. It was soon seen that larger and faster patrol boats carrying
heavier guns were needed to keep up with the newer and faster U-boats
that were sent to take the place of those the British sunk and so speedy
80 foot boats were built specially for patrolling.

“By the time we got into the war the U-boats were so big and fast that
to catch them we had to have regular torpedo boats, except they are
without torpedoes, built to run them down and this is exactly what this
chaser we are now on is. With our chaser we can go twice as fast as any
U-boat the Germans ever sent out and I’m telling you, matey, that if I
ever spot a U-boat coming to the top and she is inside the range of this
Hotchkiss her crew might just as well kiss the Kaiser good-night.”

The way the submarine chasers work is like this: A base is set up on
shore close to that part of the coast waters, or _zone_ as it is called,
that a squadron, which is formed of a dozen chasers has to patrol. The
shore base is fitted up with living quarters for the crews of the
chasers, besides reserve crews who may be needed in an emergency, and
there are also artificers, that is mechanics, carpenters, painters,
etc., who stayed on shore so that when we were relieved from duty and
came in, our boats were looked after as carefully and overhauled as
thoroughly as a millionaire’s automobile.

The base also has a wireless station and any chaser can get in touch
with it should occasion arise for her to do so. Each base also has one
or more destroyers which carry heavier guns and these are stationed near
by so that should the enemy loom up and prove too much for the guns of
our chasers the larger boats can be signaled to help.

When a squadron of chasers leaves its base for the zone it is to patrol
it is split up into two divisions of six boats each and a _division
officer_ is in charge of each one. Each chaser is given a certain area
to patrol and she works with all the other chasers in her squadron, the
shore station and ships at sea. If a U-boat has been sighted at sea, the
ship who has picked her up immediately sends a wireless message to the
base which in turn informs the commander of the squadron.

Should a U-boat venture into one of our zones the chasers get as busy as
hornets and scout around until she either slips away or comes to the top
to enable her commander to take a look around through his periscope to
see if there is a ship in sight worth using a torpedo on.

Besides the regular wireless set each submarine chaser is fitted with _a
sound conduction_ _signalling system_ and this is used to detect the
presence of a U-boat when it is submerged and cannot be seen, though to
do this the enemy boat must be near-by. This conduction scheme is very
simple and you’ll get me fine as I explain it.

[Illustration: Telephone receiver with iron rods]

Water, as you know, conducts sound waves to much greater distances than
air does. You must have often made the experiment when in swimming of
ducking your head under water and listening while another fellow would
strike a couple of stones together under water at a distance of thirty
or forty feet away from you; and yet you could hear them click as they
struck each other as plainly as you could in air a couple of feet away.

Now, signalling between submerged submarines or a submarine and a chaser
is carried on on exactly this same principle, that is by the conduction
of sound waves through the water. To do this kind of wireless signalling
each submarine has a high-frequency sound producing apparatus, or
_oscillator_ as it is called, attached to the hull. It consists of a
diaphragm, or disk, that is set into very rapid vibration by means of an
electromagnet, just as the diaphragm of a telephone receiver is made to
vibrate by its electromagnet.

The disk, or diaphragm, which is very much larger than that of a
telephone receiver, sets in the water and when it is made to vibrate by
closing the circuit with the key it sends out trains of sound waves to
considerable distances through the water.

The other submarine, or chaser, is fitted with a like disk which is
fixed to a _microphone_, or telephone transmitter, and to this a battery
and telephone receiver is connected. When the high frequency sound waves
from one submarine reaches the second submarine they impinge on the disk
of the microphone when it vibrates; this varies the battery current
flowing through the microphone and you hear the dots and dashes in the
receiver.

Now when a U-boat, or any other kind of a power vessel, gets within a
certain range of the chaser the hum of the machinery in her sets the
hull into vibration and you can hear it in the receivers. So, you see,
whether a U-boat is afloat or submerged it is pretty hard for her to
escape the eternal vigilance of the chaser.

We had received word by wireless that a U-boat had been sighted about a
hundred miles off the coast and that she was one of gigantic size. We
swept our area with great zeal, the lookouts in the crow’s nest being
changed every two hours; the gunners were at their guns ready for
instant action and John Paul Jones Boggs, the other operator and I took
turn about listening-in.

I don’t want to brag about myself but I found out a long time ago when I
was a kid operator back home that I had a more sensitive ear than any of
the other fellows, that is, I could differentiate dots and dashes and
take down messages that they could only get as a jumble of signals.
Later on I began to experiment with head-phones and tried out every make
I could get hold of in order to find one that was particularly sensitive
and especially suited to my ear.

When I was chief wireless operator on the _Andalusian_ I met operators
from all over the world. Once when I was in London I scraped up an
acquaintance with a young Swede and he had about half-a-dozen pairs of
head-phones that he had picked up in different countries. Telephone
receivers for wireless work are like violins in that no two of them are
alike and you can’t tell by their appearance what they are really worth;
like violins, too, telephone receivers improve with age provided the
magnets are made of the right kind of steel and properly tempered.

One of the pairs of head-phones this Swede operator showed me was made
in Sweden by the _Ericsson Telephone Manufacturing Company_, and it was
by far the most sensitive phone I had ever used. I bought the pair off
him for a _sovereign_ but they are worth their weight in gold. With this
pair of Ericsson’s on my head I was listening-in for all I was worth. I
kept this up intermittently for about 6 hours when I was rewarded by
hearing the faint whirring sound of a propeller. I reported it to my
commander and he said it was a U-boat all right.

He had our engine stopped so that I could hear her to the best
advantage. The sound of her machinery through the water got a little
louder and then stopped entirely and we guessed that she was resting.
Not to be fooled we stuck right to our posts another five hours but
there was nary a sound from her.

Then the lookout in the crow’s-nest telephoned down that he had sighted
the periscope of a U-boat. Did you ever see a field of race horses just
before the signal was given them to start? Well, every man-jack of us
felt just as high strung and spirited only we didn’t show it. The
commander ordered me to signal all the other U-boat chasers of our
squadron to join us.

The U-boat had come to the surface so that her captain could take a look
around and see if there was a ship in sight that was worth sinking.
Seeing nothing but our little boat the U-boat came _awash_, that is her
conning tower projected above the water and her deck was just level with
the surface of the sea. The captain of the U-boat was evidently
observing us through a port from the inside of the conning tower and
seeing that our guns were manned and that we were making for her at full
speed he had ordered her guns to be brought into action. Each gun was
mounted on her deck in a gun-well and was hoisted into place together
with its gunner by a plunger worked by compressed air.

We closed in on her and then the shells began to fly. A high sea was
running so that it was well nigh impossible for her gunners to hit us or
for ours to hit her, but soon a shell, bad luck to it, carried away one
of our masts and my aerial with it. I rushed up on deck and there I saw
eight or ten of our little chasers heading for the U-boat, which was the
_U-53_, the largest submarine that Germany had turned out with the
exception of the _Deutschland_.

As each chaser came up the fight got hotter but the U-boat stayed in the
game until her captain saw our destroyer coming and then he concluded it
was time to submerge her. We knew her captain had given the order to his
wheelsman to make her dive for her guns and gunners began to disappear
in the deck-wells and in a few seconds the covers closed down on the
latter watertight. Her hatches were closed and her engines, which had
been started, propelled her slowly through the water which must be done
to make her dive at the proper angle.

[Illustration: “A BRIGHT FLASH OF BLUE FIRE SHOT UP THROUGH THE HOLE”]

Just as her bow submerged Bill put over a shell with a _bow trajectory_,
that is, he aimed his gun so that when he fired the projectile shot high
into the air and seemed as if it would go far over the U-boat. But Bill
knew what he was doing and the shell fell squarely on the U-boat’s deck
just aft her conning tower.

Having found the range he planted three more shells on her with
marvelous accuracy; the last one went through her bow and must have
exploded in her torpedo room for a bright flash of blue fire shot up
through the hole for fifty feet and this was followed by a dense
greenish smoke that rolled out as though she was a blast furnace.

After a couple of misses Bill landed another shell on her stern and this
one ripped an awful hole in her; the water poured into her and amid a
series of explosions that threw steaming water into the air like young
geysers, with much sizzling and hissing she went down stern-end on never
to rise again.

A great hurrah went up from all hands on our boat and our Commander
commended Bill on his excellent shots.

“Three cheers for big Bill,” I shouted and the gobs responded with
mighty lung-power.

“That’s the way to swat ’em, eh, matey?” remarked Bill with grisly joy
as we were cleaning away the wreckage.

“I say it is, Bill,” I made reply.

CHAPTER X--A SIGNALMAN ON A SUBMARINE

Don’t think for a moment that Germany was the only country that had a
fleet of submarines. The reason that her U-boats came to be so well
known was because they had torpedoed the _Lusitania_ and sunk helpless
ships right and left no matter who was on them or what they carried.

England and France had fleets of submarines, too, but as their warships
had blockaded Germany’s ports there was nothing to torpedo. And when we
declared war on the Kaiser, Uncle Sam began to build submarines just as
he did chasers, merchant ships and everything else. Except airplanes,
did you say? There was no such fizzle made of building submarines as for
a time was made of building airplanes in the beginning of the war.
Within a short time after we got started our Navy Department was able to
turn out a brand-new submarine every two weeks. Think of it! Once the
kind and the size of the submarine we needed had been agreed upon by our
naval experts, that is, _standardized_ as it is called, machines and
jigs were made by which each part was stamped out of a solid sheet of
metal, and this was done, not in one or a dozen factories, but in
hundreds of factories scattered all over the country and each of which
made a single part.

These parts were shipped to docks at various ports on the Atlantic
seaboard and there artificers of all kinds were ready to assemble them,
that is, to put them together. Thus it was that in two weeks after the
ore was mined it was made into parts, assembled and the submarine was
ready for its perilous cruise.

While the building of submarines was thus speeded up there was another
factor that made for their efficiency as a destructive engine of war
which was just as important as the boats themselves and that was the
crews to man them. Aye, and there was the rub, for a crew could not be
trained for this highly specialized work in less than two months’ time
and sometimes it took three or four months.

Because the submarine job was considered an extra-hazardous one,
volunteers were called for to man the boats and as an inducement for
bluejackets to do so a good _bonus_, that is, extra pay was offered. Now
Bill Adams knew all about submarines, as I think I told you before, for
he had worked for the _Holland Submarine Boat Company_ long before the
world-war started.

“Let’s me and you go to it, matey,” he said, in one of his bursts of
patriotism; “it isn’t quite as soft a snap as we’ve got on this here
chaser but we gets more time ashore and then we helps our Uncle Sammy.
Besides I’ve made up me mind to buy me mother a flivver; all the
washladies in our neighborhood is ridin’ to and from work in them baby
land-tanks of Mr. Ford’s, and I guess what they can do she can do, eh,
matey?”

“Why not?” I allowed. “She’s got a better right to ride in a motor car
than a lot of those high-falutin’ women who live in glass conning towers
on Fifth Avenue and never had a son to fight for Uncle Sam. They take
everything and they give nothing.”

“Well, I wouldn’t quite say that, matey,” Bill answered thinking hard
within the limits of his ability; “I used to be a kind of anarchist
myself, I guess, as I always felt as how I’d like to throw a bomb--no,
not a bum--into some of them swell places, but I’ve got all over it.
Why? Because if it wasn’t for them big bugs, them rich Janes, there
wouldn’t be any _Red Cross_, see? Every last one of ’em that is over
eight and under eighty is handin’ out the coin, givin’ the glad hand and
workin’ like gobs holystonin’ the decks and scrapin’ cable for us guys
what’s in the navy and army. But I’m askin’ you, as man to man, matey,
will you volunteer with me for submarine duty?”

“I’m willing to try anything once, Bill, and I’ll take a chance with you
on this submarine deal,” I told him.

So Bill and I signed up for submarine service and after the crew to
which we belonged had had intensive training for several weeks we were
assigned to the _H-24_ and we went down to Newport to man her. There the
first time I saw her she was swinging from a crane high in the air for
this was the way they launch these sea babies. She was simply lifted
bodily from the dock where she was assembled, swung over the water and
gently deposited on the surface.

It was a good thing that I had had experience on a submarine chaser for
the quarters of this submarine were so small I couldn’t for the life of
me see how her complement of men, of whom there were 36, including
officers and seamen, could get into the boat, much less live and do
their work. I suffered a good deal at first because when we were all
inside her there wasn’t anywhere to go, not even out, when she was
submerged. In fact I felt very much as though I was riding in the
drawing room of a Pullman, or locked up in jail, which is about the same
thing.

As when we were on the chaser, I was the wireless man and Bill was the
gunner whose business it was to work the rapid fire gun on deck. Bill
didn’t mind being in the close quarters of the submarine at all and I
took it that he must have been one of those kids who thought it great
fun to snake his way through a fifteen foot length of gas-pipe main that
was just big enough around to let his body pass providing he didn’t get
stuck.

Do you know I always thought I was a sailor until I went on my first
cruise in that submarine. But no, I’m no sailor and you can take it from
me there were precious few of the others of our crew besides the
commanding officer and Bill who were sure-enough tars of the old Neptune
stripe. I’ll bet you a dollar to a glass of grape-juice that of the
thirty-six men on board--or shall I say _in_ board--thirty of them were
sea-sick. Of all the rolling and pitching a boat ever did I’ll give the
cake to _H-24_.

Not only that but when we were running _light_, that is when she was as
high out of the water as she could get with all the water out of her
ballast tanks, and we had rough weather I had to strap myself in my
chair to keep from being thrown around the room. As one of the torpedo
men used to sing, “Mr. Captain, stop the ship I want to get out and
walk,” and, indeed, I would have given my pay and the bonus to boot to
have had my old job back again on the chaser. It was all Bill’s fault
and I didn’t mind telling him so either.

“I should worry, matey,” he would say, and that’s all the satisfaction I
could get out of him.

After the _rookies_ got over being seasick we went out on practise trips
when each man was taught all about the machinery and how to work it.
This was done so that in case a man was put out of action another could
take his place. It didn’t take me very long to get _hep_ to all the
tricks for I already knew the A B C of oil engines, which again came in
handy; storage batteries were right in my line and the rest of the
machinery was pie for me.

The _H-24_ has a hull that is very much like a huge catfish, that is it
has a blunt round head and the torpedo tubes, one on either side, look
for all the world like a pair of great eyes; the body tapers off
gracefully to a point at the tail and on this the direction rudder is
attached. Two horizontal rudders, or _hydroplanes_ as they are called,
by which the submarine is given its diving angle, are fastened one to
each side of her head and give the appearance of a pair of great lateral
fins.

Her hull is built up of thin but exceedingly strong sheets of steel and
these are riveted together in the same fashion as the hull of any steel
ship. When you consider that the hull of a submarine must be able to
stand a pressure of at least 200 pounds to the square inch--as much as a
high pressure steam boiler--without collapsing when it is fully
submerged it must be clear that the strongest steel plate which can be
made must be used.

A steel deck, or superstructure as it is called, covers the top of the
hull from bow to stern, nearly, and on its middle sets the _conning
tower_. A steering wheel and compass are fixed to the side of the
conning tower so that the boat can be steered from the outside when she
is running light or awash.

A short mast, called a _stanchion_, is also fixed to the conning tower
and this carries the signal lights and holds one end of the aerial, the
other end being fastened to the stern. It isn’t much of an aerial but as
our submarine was built for coast patrol cruising we were never very far
from shore.

The inside of the hull is partitioned off into rooms, or compartments,
and these can be shut off from each other by means of bulkhead doors and
so made watertight. The purpose of these watertight compartments is to
prevent the water from filling the whole boat if she should be unlucky
enough to be hit by a shell or rammed by a ship. To my way of thinking
watertight compartments seem to be of little use whether the boat be a
submarine or the largest ship. For instance when the _Titanic_ was
scrapped by an iceberg and the _Lusitania_ was hit by a U-boat torpedo
they both went down in a few minutes.

I won’t try to tell you what all the different compartments have in them
but some of them are most uncommonly interesting and these you should
know about. The first is the conning tower with its _periscope_. When
the submarine is running either light or awash and the weather is good
the commander can see what’s what around him from the deck or from the
_bridge_, as we call the top of the conning tower. When the weather is
rough or an enemy is nigh he takes a look around through the ports, that
is, watertight windows, in the conning tower.

Should, however, the boat be submerged and the captain wants to size up
the situation he permits only the top of her periscope to project out of
the water and through this he scans the sea. Whenever I got a chance I
used to look through the periscope. At first it was hard for me to make
out a vessel on the surface because the field of view was small and what
with the boat rolling from port to starboard it seemed to me I was
always looking at the water or the sky; but after awhile I got so I
could take in whatever there was to see in between times.

Our submarine had two periscopes, one of the older kind that you have to
turn around in order to see the whole horizon, and the other, which was
the latest style, showed the whole horizon at once with a magnified view
of the ship or other vessel in the distance in the center. This scheme
was a great invention as it prevented us from being attacked from behind
unawares. It was like having a third eye in the back of your head.

Inside the conning tower are also speaking tubes and an electric system
of lights and bells worked by pushbuttons and these run into all the
compartments; by means of these intelligence transmission systems our
captain could get in touch instantly with the chiefs of the crew in the
engine, diving, torpedo and wireless rooms.

There are also several instruments in the conning tower and among these
is a _depth meter_, that is, a device that shows just how far below the
surface of the water the boat is. An _inclinometer_ which points out the
angle at which the diving rudder, or hydroplane is set, and a
_tell-tale_, that is a bank of miniature lamps, each of which is
connected to a detector in a compartment. Now if the boat should spring
a leak the detector closes the current and the lamp is lit.

Then there is another electrical system that closes all the bulkhead
doors by electricity. The instant the tell-tale lamp lights up and shows
that a compartment is leaking the commander presses a button which rings
a bell in it and this warns any of the crew who may happen to be in it
to get out; by throwing a switch the current operating the motors which
work the bulkhead door is cut in and the door is screwed down
watertight. Should a shell put the conning tower out of commission the
boat can still be steered from the navigating room in her hull.

The power plant that drove the _H-24_ was a big 12-cylinder oil burning
engine that developed, I should say, about 3,000 horsepower and it
worked on the same general plan as a motor car engine. Now when the boat
runs light or awash the engine drives her propeller direct and at the
same time the engine runs a dynamo and this charges a large storage
battery.

But when the boat is running submerged the engine has to be shut down
because the burnt gases cannot exhaust into the water as the pressure of
the latter is too great. A powerful electric motor is coupled to the
propeller shaft and this is energized by the current from the storage
battery.

The ballast tanks into and from which water is pumped to make the boat
sink and rise is in the middle of the bottom of the hull. The torpedo
room is for’ard in the bow of the boat, our sleeping quarters aft of
this and my wireless room lay between our sleeping quarters and the
navigating room.

While life on the submarine was not exactly what you would call a
pleasure bout still we were all keyed up to the point where we wanted to
get in our fine work on the _boches_. Finally the time came when we
received orders to move and while only the officers knew where to or for
what purpose at the time of departure we were all let into the secret
after we had got under way.

At the beginning of the war the Germans had vessels of various sizes in
all parts of the world. Those that were in our ports were interned while
some of the smaller ones that were at sea became pirate ships,
technically known as _raiders_. They flew the flag of Germany when it
suited them to do so but they hoisted any flag that would best help out
their diabolical plans.

These raiders scoured the seven seas and whenever they ran across an
unarmed merchant ship bound for any port of the Allies they promptly
shelled and sunk her and, more often than not, without giving the
ill-fated crew enough time to take to the life boats. As Bill Adams used
to say, “I calls it murder.”

Of course if the raiders could have taken their prizes to their own
ports they would gladly have done so for Germany sorely needed whatever
cargoes they carried, but the raiders could not do this for the Allies
had blockaded every port of the Central Powers. This being true the next
best thing to do from the German point of view was to sink the ship and
drown the crew.

There were two or three of these German raiders steaming up and down our
Atlantic coast and they operated a few hundred miles off shore and out
of the beaten paths. It seemed likely that they worked, part of the time
at least, in conjunction with U-boats for whenever a ship went forth
armed a torpedo sank her but if she was unarmed the raider’s guns sent
her to the bottom.

Uncle Sam was getting mighty tired of this sort of business and so he
hatched up a little scheme. A small steamer, the _Henrietta_, was fitted
out without guns, painted a sea-gray and flew the stars and stripes when
she was sent to sea. Our submarine was sent with her, not exactly as a
convoy for she was not sailing for any overseas port but instead she was
sent out simply as a decoy.

We followed her at a distance of about a mile and as long as there were
no other ships in sight we ran light, though the way the waves broke
over her she seemed to be running awash most of the time. This made no
difference to us and it was a great relief to come up from our stuffy
holes and walk the deck. Of all my sea-going experiences I liked this
much the best.

Why? You know how a city chap with a drop of red blood in his veins
likes to get out in the woods and walk, eat and sleep on the ground. He
does it simply because he gets as close to nature as he ever can and
know about it. Well, when I walked the bit of deck of the _H-24_ I got
just as close to the sea as I could and yet stay above water and there
was a mighty fascination about it too.

We cruised about most of the time in a light condition, though we
occasionally had to submerge and tagged around after the _Henrietta_
which acted as a base, or mother-ship to us. It was a curious thing how
merchant ships that made every effort to keep out of the way of raiders
would run right into them and that the _Henrietta_ who was out for this
very purpose couldn’t meet up with anything more dangerous than a
sea-gull.

But hold, matey, what’s that the Captain of the _Henrietta_ sends over
by wireless? We can’t see the ship for we set too close to the water but
he can make it out very well with his glasses. We dive until we are
completely submerged but still following in the wake of the _Henrietta_
according to a prearranged scheme.

“Ship headed for us,” the _Henrietta’s_ Captain signaled our Commander
by our sound conduction system.

“She flies the French flag,” he sent to us next.

Then later on I got this and handed it to our commander:

“Believe she’s a German raider.”

Every man was at his post and ready and anxious to do his duty. When the
raider, which was the _Koln_ and one of the worst offenders of her kind,
was within half-a-mile of the _Henrietta_ she sent a shot over her bow
and signaled her to _stand by_. This she did and then the Captain of the
_Koln_ signaled that he would send his officers to examine her papers
and cargo--to get whatever gold she might have--and this he promptly
did. At the same time he had her guns trained on the helpless
_Henrietta_ to prevent her from trying to steam away or putting on all
speed and ramming her with her sharp bow.

Just as the officers of the _Koln_ were being lowered in a launch the
Captain of the _Henrietta_ signaled our commander just two words and
these were: “Torpedo her.”

[Illustration: “OUR TORPEDO PASSED THROUGH THE RAIDER’S HULL AND
EXPLODED INSIDE”]

We came to the surface about a thousand feet from and on the port side
of the _Koln_ and took her completely by surprise. Her gunners began
blazing away at us but they had evidently not been trained in the gentle
art of swatting submarines for the trajectory of their shells was way
too flat, that is it was not curved enough and with, possibly, two
exceptions they struck the water and instead of sinking they
_ricocheted_, that is they were thrown from it again on the same
principle that a flat stone skips along on the water when you throw it
nearly parallel to its surface.

Bill was right there with his semi-automatic and dropped a couple of
shells on the deck of the _Koln_. In less time than it takes to tell it
to you our commander had swung our submarine round so that one of her
torpedo tubes was pointed directly at the _Koln_ and gave the signal to
the officer of the torpedo crew to shoot the torpedo. He turned on the
compressed air which drives the torpedo from its tube and it shot out
and into the sea. We watched it with all eyes as it traveled like a blue
streak under its own power below the surface and dead on for the
broadside of the _Koln_.

The German crew saw the white trail it left behind and they must have
become panic-stricken for some of them jumped overboard, others manned
the life-boats and bungled the job so that two of the boats capsized
before they ever touched the water. In less than a minute the torpedo
struck the hull amidships, passed through it to the inside and exploded
with a terrific report.

It looked to me as if the whole ship was thrown bodily out of the water
by the sheer force of the explosion and then parted in her middle. As
she settled down on the water a great black cloud of smoke poured out of
her hold and when the air struck her she caught fire and was soon a
solid, seething sheet of flame. It was the most magnificent spectacle I
have ever seen from longitude 0 to 70 degrees west of Greenwich and from
the Equator to the Pole.

Different from the German idea of _kultur_, instead of letting the crew
of the _Koln_ drown, the Captain of the _Henrietta_ sent out boats and
stood by until all of them were picked up and on board his ship.

We then sailed back to our naval base where the German crew was taken
off and interned in a concentration camp until the war ended. Their
fighting days were over while on the other hand mine had just commenced.

CHAPTER XI--WITH THE FIELD ARTILLERY IN FRANCE

The strain from being cooped up in the small and stuffy quarters of the
_H-24_ was beginning to tell on me and the blind way in which we had to
manœuver did not make me care for the life so I bethought me it would be
a nice change to get into the flying game.

Moreover my arm had begun to pain me considerably at times and so I
determined to get a disability discharge. This was not a hard thing to
do for any one with a heart need not be told that a man with a game arm
should not be made to continue in active service if he didn’t want to.

Consequently in February I received my discharge and after seeing my
folks I concluded it would be best to have my arm operated on to remove
the stiffness. This I did and after the plaster casts that had been
around it for a month were removed I was once again the owner of two
good, strong, healthy arms and in every way fit for service of any kind
should I care to enlist again.

To get a commission as a lieutenant in the Flying Corps was not as easy
as I thought it would be and I found the whole machinery of making an
application so clogged with red-tape that the farthest I was able to get
was to satisfy the insatiable curiosity of military authorities as to
everything pertaining to myself, parents and even down to the dimensions
of my great grandmother’s left ankle. I was simply out of luck!

The more I thought about it, though, the more I was determined to get to
France where the _big game_ was going on. So one bright May morning I
went down to a recruiting station at 42nd Street and 6th Avenue, New
York, with an entirely original idea and that was to enlist in the
cavalry. I picked the cavalry because I thought the outdoor life would
help to build me up and that riding a horse would not make my feet as
sore as marching.

While I could have enlisted in the _Signal Corps_ as a wireless operator
I believed my chances for seeing red blooded life overseas were better
if I joined one of the common or line branches of the service. Having
eaten a salt mackerel for breakfast and washed it down with a bucket of
water (I was a little underweight) I went down to the recruiting
station. In a crowded downstairs room filled with a crew of other
fellows waiting to enlist I filled out a card giving my age, residence
and consent to be enlisted should I pass the physical examination which
was held every couple of hours.

We were stripped of our clothes, lined up in a row and one by one we
were examined by the recruiting officer who put us through eye, foot,
breathing and other like tests. I had hard work to keep my _game_ arm
from failing me but I came through all right. Finally I was weighed in,
cautioned against the extreme penalties of lying and then asked all
about my past life. The officer in charge of the station was next called
in and gave each of us a little physical inspection of his own, with the
result that he threw out a few of the candidates as being unfit. Sixteen
had been accepted and--oh, joy--I was one of them.

This done we dressed, signed a register which showed we had been
accepted, were given _sealed orders_ and transportation and told to
report to Fort Slocum, on New York Harbor. After a long ride on the
subway, trolley and government ferry I arrived at Fort Slocum. It is
located on an island in the harbor and is formed chiefly of houses for
the officers, regular barracks for the infantrymen, or _doughboys_ as
they are called, who are stationed there all the time, and a lot of
wooden shacks and tents for the recruits who come in.

The examination I was given at the recruiting station wasn’t a marker to
that which I received at Fort Slocum and as a result it was not until
the night of the day after I got there that I was sworn in and duly
became a recruit in the cavalry of the United States Army.

I stayed at Fort Slocum for the better part of two weeks waiting
patiently for the time when I should hear my name called among the
others of the daily outgoing list, and be one of the recruits to go away
to be trained. I had hoped to be sent to Texas for my training but when
at last I was on the outbound list it was for Fort D. A. Russell,
Wyoming.

After a four-day ride on a troop train we arrived at Fort Russell which
is about three miles from Cheyenne. There our cars were switched onto a
siding and we landed just as the sun was setting in the golden west. And
say, man, as far as the eye could reach except in one direction, where
there were mountains, the land was as level as the sea in a doldrum. Oh,
why, oh, why, did I ever leave my happy berth on the _H-24_?

Up to the time of our arrival the Fort had not been occupied except by
the officers and a few old service men from the Mexican border who were
to act as non-commissioned officers while we were being trained. A few
of the officers were at the post station and we--there were about 200
all told--were marched over to headquarters where the troop commanders
were waiting for us.

Teamsters, horseshoers, clerks and recruits having other trades of a
useful kind were picked from the bunch and assigned to troops. If I had
wanted to I could have been a troop-clerk which carries with it a
Corporal’s warrant but since I had enlisted I made up my mind to go in
as a common trooper and get my share of riding and my fill of
drilling--both of which I did--like the rest of them. So it came about I
was assigned to _M Troop, 315th Cavalry, U. S. A._

Now Wyoming is different from the Amazon country in that there are no
trees and the ground is covered with short, sunburned buffalo grass.
From the post I could see the Rocky Mountains a hundred miles away and
from this you may conclude that after Nature got tired of making all the
other countries she made Wyoming--but not so, for Arizona came after.

To make up for whatever the scenery may have lacked the post was a
marvel and neither money nor labor had been spared to make it
comfortable. I’ve been in apartment houses on Riverside Drive that
couldn’t hold a candle to it. There were large two story brick barracks
with big squad rooms where we bunked and a big mess hall where we ate.
In front of the barracks was the drill ground and there for an hour and
a half every morning we did the _dismounted drill_ of the cavalryman and
then the rest of the morning was given over to _equitation_, which in
every day American means riding.

Our horses were of the genuine western variety and--woe be me--most of
them had never been ridden before except once or twice perhaps, by the
wranglers of the remount stations. This being true the eastern recruits
spent the best part of the time between the horses’ backs, the air and
finding a soft place to land. A fellow could lash himself to a stanchion
in a submarine but never to the back of a bucking broncho.

Along about this time Cheyenne held its annual _Frontier Day_. This
consists of gathering the best riders and ropers from all over the
United States who compete for the glory there is in it though not
overlooking the big purses offered. All through _Frontier Day_--or week,
it should be called--Cheyenne slipped back half a century. The city was
filled with booted and spurred cowpunchers from every ranching state in
the Union. They wore sombreros and shirts of every color the rainbow
affords. Then out at the race track at Frontier Park I saw such feats as
squaw races, trick riding and fancy roping; roping, throwing and hog
tying a steer in 23 seconds--the world’s record--and bull-dogging a
steer. I pined for my old pal Bill Adams to see these landlubber stunts.

After four months of drill and riding, pistol and rifle practise on the
target range, in fact just as we were beginning to consider ourselves
old cavalrymen, we were given a sudden jolt by being told that no more
cavalry would be sent overseas and that we would be changed to light
field artillery. Now there are a couple of lines in an old army song
that run like this:

  “The Infantry for bravery,   The Artillery for slavery.”

We were a badly disappointed crew, but a good soldier is one who obeys
orders no matter how tough they are and we were good soldiers. In due
course of time we were shipped to West Point, Kentucky, where we were to
receive our artillery training in seventy-two days and then go overseas.

Because I had been a wireless, or _radio_, operator as it is now more
often called, and because wireless is an important part of artillery I
was immediately picked to go to the radio-school. I laughed at the idea
of my going to radio-school. What’s the use when I am already an expert
operator and had been in the Navy? But I found out there were still a
few things I could learn about wireless.

In the artillery the _eyes_ of the army, which is the aviation section,
provides the artillery with airplane and balloon service and in order to
cooperate successfully with them the wireless operator must have a
special training. For three weeks or so we did nothing but _buzzer_
practise; that is a buzzer, which is an electric bell without the bell,
is connected in circuit with a battery, a telegraph key and some twenty
head-phones. The beginners put on the receivers and an instructor worked
the key.

As I could easily take twenty words a minute I was made an instructor.
Then there were lectures on the elements of electricity and magnetism
and by the end of the first month the class was ready for the
fundamentals of wireless telegraphy. All of that was old stuff for me
and as they say in the army it was _pickin’s_.

The time came when we were introduced to the real wireless apparatus and
although the sets were portable and of shorter range than any I had
handled since I was a kid operator they were certainly beauties. There
were three different types or wireless sets; each one was designed to
cover a certain distance, and each sending set had its special receiving
set. The range of the smallest set was about a mile, while that of the
largest was about twenty-five miles. These are very short ranges but
enough for army purposes where messages are sent from the trenches
through one operator after another or relayed until they reach
headquarters.

As I said before the purpose of the wireless stations is to cooperate
with airplanes and balloons and aid in the control of artillery fire. So
in the months that followed our work was to go out on the firing range
with the batteries and to cooperate with the airplanes and balloons.

I had been warranted as Corporal in charge of the _2nd Battalion Radio
Detail_. You know, I suppose, that a regiment consists of two
battalions, each battalion of three batteries, each battery of four guns
and the complement of about 200 odd men necessary for their action, So
my detail was responsible for coordinating the _eyes_, that is the
airplanes and balloons of the three batteries in the second battalion,
with the guns.

Possibly you may wonder why it is necessary for airplanes to work with
the batteries and here is the answer: the guns, or _pieces_ as they are
called, were American 75’s, that is, the bore of the gun is 75
millimeters in diameter, and as the range they are fired over is seldom
less than two miles some one must _spot_ the fire, that is see just
where the shells hit around the target and then tell the gun crew so
that they can point their guns more accurately, all of which is called
_directing the fire_.

Now an airplane can do this to perfection but there must be some kind of
communication established between it and the battery, and this is where
we came in with our wireless. I had five men in my detail, there being
two operators and three _panelmen_ and of the latter and their work I
will tell you later.

Our regular performance each day was like this: The batteries would go
out to the range in the morning, place their guns and set up their B. C.
stations, that is, _Battery Commander_ stations where the Battery
Commander would be located within a few feet of the pieces to work out
any problems that might arise in aiming them.

With the detail and accompanied by a second lieutenant, who was the
officer in charge, we would arrive at the range a few minutes before one
o’clock which was the time the batteries were scheduled to fire. The
operators and the panelmen would get busy setting up the aerial wire
system. This consisted of two jointed masts about fifteen feet high and
each one of which was made in five sections.

The masts would be set up about a hundred yards apart and a single
aerial wire was stretched between them. The leading-in wire was then
connected to a receiving set and the latter to the _ground_. This was
formed of a pair of wires stretched on the ground directly under the
aerial wire and to each of their free ends a copper mat was fixed with a
little dirt thrown over it.

The whole equipment is so built that we used to set it up ready for work
in from three to five minutes. The operators then adjusted their
head-phones and were ready to _tune-in_ the incoming signals from the
airplane as soon as it should come in sight. You see, our detail on the
ground only received wireless signals from the airplane while the
operator in it, or _observer_ as he is called, only sent wireless
signals. This one sided arrangement had to be used because the propeller
makes so much noise that the operator in the airplane would have trouble
in reading the signals. In order to signal to the airplane as she flew
above us we used a system of _panels_.

[Illustration: “THE AIRPLANE SIGNALLED DOWN TO US IN CODE”]

This consists of a large piece of white cloth about twelve feet square
spread out on the ground and three strips of white cloth twelve feet
long and a couple of feet wide. These strips are laid in different
positions relative to the square and each position has a number that
means an order which the observer in the airplane also knows.

Further a small black square about eighteen inches on the side is placed
on the big white square so that the observer can tell which battalion
the outfit belongs to. The different positions of the strips and square
are given numbers and the panelmen as well as the observer know what
order each number means. As the panels can be arranged in twenty-seven
different positions it is just about as hard to learn the panel code as
it is the Morse alphabet.

Now as soon as the wireless apparatus has been set up the panelmen put
out their big square and one strip at the end of it, and when the
airplane comes close enough to see the panels he knows that we want him
to _designate_, that is to name the target which the battery is to fire
at. This he sends to us by wireless and our operators write it down.

While our detail was setting up the wireless apparatus, the _telephone
detail_ from our outfit had run a _wire line_ from our B. C. station to
the batteries which are several hundred yards ahead of us. When our
operators get the target, or _pin-point_ as it is called, from the
observer in the airplane, he (the operator) phones it to the battery
commander who orders the guns set for it.

The airplane then signals down to us in code and asks “is the battery
ready?” The telephone man tells us that the battery is ready and the
panelmen put out No. 5, which means “the battery is ready.” The airplane
observer sends down “_fire_,” our operators yell the order to the
telephone man who in turn shouts it into the mouthpiece of his ’phone;
the ’phone operator at the battery end informs the Battery Commander and
he gives the order when the guns are fired either by _piece_, that is
one at a time, or by _salvo_, which is all at once.

We immediately put out No. 8 panels which mean that “the battery has
fired.” Shrapnel is used during these trial shots as the observer in the
airplane can easily see by the bursts just how far or close they come to
the target and this is what he does. After having seen where the shots
landed the observer flies back over our station and signals down to us
the number of yards to the right or left of the target and _short_ or
_over_ the shots landed.

The telephone man sends this to his Battery Commander, who computes the
necessary correction in aiming the gun, and the performance of signaling
and firing is repeated until every shot becomes a _target_, that is,
hits squarely on the mark.

At intervals of half-an-hour the balloon station, that is, the captive
balloon, sends out _meteorological data_, which means weather reports,
chief of which are the barometer readings, by wireless and this we get
and transmit to the B. C. station by telephone, At 4 P.M. the batteries
cease firing, we take down and pack up our station and go back to camp.

As I have said we repeated this performance for a month until we were
letter perfect in cooperating with the airplanes. And then one morning
almost without a word of warning we were told to pack up our personal
equipment. We turned over the wireless apparatus to the supply officer
of the company and by evening we were on our way to Camp Mead, Maryland,
which was one of the ports of embarkation for overseas men. We spent ten
glorious days at Camp Mead without a tap of work to do.

On the morning of the eleventh day we boarded a big three stack
troop-ship, weighed anchor and by noon we were off for France. To most
of the men aboard, many of whom had never seen the ocean before, and
some of them were never to see it after, the voyage was a great joy or a
big sorrow according to the states of their stomachs, but to me it was a
long and tiresome trip. The ship had been altered from a floating palace
into a purveyance which would carry the greatest number of men it was
possible to crowd into her.

On the morning of the eighth day after we had embarked we landed at
Liverpool and were given a royal reception by the enthusiastic Britons.
The way they warmed up to us was a revelation to me for I had no more
idea that an Englishman could change his attitude toward an American
than that a jaguar could change his spots. The miracle had come to pass
nevertheless.

From Liverpool we went on to London riding in first class compartment
coaches as if we owned the railroad. We were in Lunnon, old dear, for a
week in which time we paraded, and were dined and petted as if each
man-jack of the whole bloomin’ outfit was a Beau Brummel, a Count
D’Orsay, a Lord Byron, or some other dandy of a century before. I forgot
entirely that a world-war was going on across the Channel and that we
were over there to fight monsters of the kind that bayoneted babies,
instead of living like dukes.

Then one night we were slipped in darkness from Folkestone across the
English Channel to Calais. If the joy of the British in seeing us two
thousand strong was great it wasn’t a marker to that of the French who
cheered us as we marched through the streets of Paris, and later when
the batteries had been dismissed they opened their arms to
us--especially the _demoiselles_. Talk about _morale_, why I could have
licked a dozen _boches_ with my left arm tied back of me. That was the
kind of fighting men the Hindenburg line had to go up against.

A couple of weeks later we were joined by our 75’s and horses which had
been shipped across on a different boat. From that time on we moved by
forced marches until we were only twenty miles back of the fighting
line. For a month we were held in reserve and each day we would go out,
as did numberless other batteries, set up our station and work with our
airplane as we had done at West Point.

We were getting pretty tired of it for we wanted to see action and there
right ahead of us was the big adventure where there was action a-plenty.
At last one day came the call we had looked forward to so long and we
marched under cover of the night to our position somewhere between the
Argonne foothills and Château Thierry.

When daylight broke a most amazing sight spread out before us for there
was a string of 75’s stretching on either side of our battery as far as
the eye could reach and forming an almost solid wall. There was no
trench fighting going on here, just open warfare between artillery,
that’s all.

[Illustration: “BUT FOR EVERY ONE THE BOCHES SENT WE PUT OVER TWO OR
THREE”]

The registering of the batteries was guessed at so that the enemy would
be taken by surprise and he was. The command to fire was given and we
let go a howling hurricane of shells that deluged the enemy. The German
guns rallied to meet our attack and from that time on a royal artillery
duel was on. Once under cover of a heavy _barrage_ their shock troops
came on only to be mowed down by us at point blank range.

Talk about fire and brimstone of the infernal regions, it is a feeble
place of punishment as against the hades let loose in our sector that
morning. Shells were screaming through the air and bursting all around
us but for every one the boches sent we put over two or three. Our men
were dropping but we kept the guns going as if they were fed and fired
by machinery.

A shell had put our wireless equipment out of action, killed a couple of
our men, wounded a couple more and stunned me for a few minutes. When I
came to I went over to the battery and was giving the gunners a hand.
Planes were darting back and forth over us and every little while
terrific battles took place between our fliers and the _boches_ for the
supremacy of the air. Suddenly I saw the airplane attached to our
battery fighting half a dozen enemy planes, which was often the case for
the Germans had four or five times as many airplanes as we had at that
time.

Our airplane had caught on fire and she fell within 300 yards of our
lines. I saw one of our airmen crawl from her and then fall over on the
ground. I crept out in a rain of bursting shells to where our machine
lay and managed to extricate Flight Lieutenant Ross from the débris and
as good luck would have it he was not much hurt. Then I lifted Observer
Gilfillan onto my back and we started for our line. When we were within
a hundred feet of it a sliver from an exploding shell struck me in the
leg and shivered it. I crawled back and another man brought Gilfillan
the rest of the way. After being treated at the field hospital we were
removed to the base hospital where I was decorated. Soon after I was
sent to Paris and since it was clear I could no longer be of service I
was returned home and discharged, and--here I am. That’s the thumb-nail
sketch of how I did my bit for Uncle Sam.

CHAPTER XII--MUSTERED OUT

Jack Heaton and I had just finished our goulash at Moquin’s on Sixth
Avenue (New York), and the waiter, under the stimulus of a piece of
money, graciously removed the table cloth as he had been asked to do on
twelve previous occasions.

I took a couple of quires of blank paper out of my brief case and laid
them in front of me; then I produced a pair of fountain pens, one filled
with black ink and the other with red ink, the latter for writing on
chapter headings and putting in such corrections as might be necessary,
and all of which showed without any deduction that I was in for a
writing spell.

“Well, Jack, we’ve got down to the last chapter and this sitting will
finish it,” I started off encouragingly.

“I’ve told you all my experiences and if there’s any more to be said I
guess you’ll have to say it, Mr. Collins,” remarked the bored young
soldier.

“No, my boy,” I said firmly, “there are still some outstanding features
about wireless I want to talk over with you, and besides I have never
turned in a script to my publishers that had less than twelve chapters,
that is, except a shortcut arithmetic and the shorter a book of that
kind is the better.”

“I don’t know of any outstanding features as you call them; it seems to
me I’ve told you everything that ever happened to me. What else can I
say?” protested the young man.

“Give me your version of how we met, tell how you looked in that natty
overseas uniform, how I looked, what is on your mind now and all that
sort of thing. Then we’ll discuss the wireless transmission of power,
wireless airships and submarines, talking to Mars and finally about the
diamond fields of South America for I’m as interested in them as your
friend Bill Adams,” I suggested.

Jack laughed.

“Why, if I painted a word picture of you I’m afraid you and I’d part
company.”

“Hardly, my boy, hardly,” I reassured him. “I’ve gone through war, or
what war is; I’ve licked a couple of would-be Kaisers myself and I’m
going after a few more of them before I have done with life. I am,
forsooth, a bit battle scarred but my skin is as thick as that of a
rhinocerous. Any little thing that you might say about me I’d be
delighted to jot it down.”

“Let’s see,” reflected Jack, “when we left off yesterday I had just been
discharged from the hospital and was back with my folks in Montclair.
When I was able to get around I wanted to see Broadway and came over one
morning with dad. I was feeling bully as I was strolling down the trail
when suddenly I spied a man I once knew although I hadn’t seen him in
years, no, not since I was a kid operator learning wireless.

“He was a tall, spare man like yourself, whose legs, as honest Abe once
said, were long enough to reach to the ground. He might have been
anywhere up to a hundred and five, by which I mean his age and not his
weight; at any rate he had surely seen fifty summers and heaven only
knows how many hard falls.

“He was slightly stoop-shouldered, which I suspect was due to his
sticking to his desk too closely, or, perchance, because he couldn’t
shake the weight of his own tragedies from them. His face was pale,
quiet and cadaverous, but whatever troubles he may have had and however
many, they seemed not to have attacked his hair for it was all there,
nearly,--though I didn’t count ’em--with not a gray one to mar their
beautiful mouse-like color. In truth, he dressed like you, looked like
you and, by gravy, he _was_ you, Mr. Collins.”

Jack laughed heartily at this photo-impression of his old friend and I
was glad to know that after all he had gone through with here, there and
everywhere and the pain he had suffered and was suffering even then, he
was still able to see the humor in so grisly a subject. I laughed, too,
just to show him that I had not yet given up the ship and, hence, there
was still hope for us both.

“Turn about is fair play and now that you have given a word picture of
me I’ll give one of you. As I remember our meeting it was like this: I
was hurrying up Broadway one morning when suddenly a young soldier
stepped abruptly in front of me thereby barring any farther progress on
my part. I observed he had a trim fighting figure and wore the uniform
we love so well. He wore puttees and limped somewhat but from the medals
he wore on his breast I judged that he had met the enemy and that they
were his--and ours.

“His was a fine, heroic face and the very way his overseas cap set on
the side of his head, his smiling eyes, his hearty laugh and the firm,
smooth grasp of his hand was enough to show me that he was one of the
brave boys from over there who had caught ‘the torch from failing hands
and held it high in Flanders fields.’

“‘Don’t you remember me, Mr. Collins?’ he cried. ‘I’m Jack Heaton, and
you used to let me make things in your laboratory over in Newark when I
was a kid!’

“‘Of course I remember you but, my, how you have grown. I never would
have known you. You were rather a frail chap then and now you’re such a
powerfully built young fellow.’ And then we talked about you and all
your experiences since I last saw you. I told you that you ought to
write a book and you said that there wasn’t much to write, and that if
it was done I’d have to do it for you.

“Then we agreed we’d collaborate, you to furnish the experiences and I
to write them out and I wanted to give you whatever was made from the
sale of the book and that I would take the glory of having written it
for my share of the profits; but you wouldn’t have it any other way but
that we would divvy fifty-fifty.”

“That part was all right,” put in Jack, “but what made a hit with me was
that you said you knew a publisher who would take the book and forthwith
we drew up a provisional table of contents. Then we went over to your
publisher; you explained the idea to the editor and gave him the table
of contents and we got the contract the next day. And do you know, Mr.
Collins, that my leg began to feel better right away!”

“That was some weeks ago, Jack, but I’ve enjoyed your company so much
and have been so interested in what you’ve told me I wish we had it all
to do over again. Well, Jack, we must to work again.”

“All right, but before we get busy I want to tell you of a _séance_ I
once had with King Solomon. Do you believe in spirits--in wireless
spirits?”

“Heard of all kinds of wireless and several kinds of spirits but don’t
know the breed called _wireless spirits_,” I admitted.

“I was introduced to one in London. One evening an operator from one of
the Red Star liners who was interested in magic, spiritualism and all
that sort of thing, wanted me to go with him to see a performance of
Maskelyn and Devant’s Mysteries at St. George’s Hall in Langham Place,
W. C.

“The mysteries of these mystifiers were mystical enough to mystify the
most mysterious and I saw everything from the wonderful East Indian rope
trick to the equally wonderful spirit rapping table. David Devant, the
celebrated conjurer, exhibited the table and he said--and nobody in the
audience disputed him--that the table possessed the ghostly property of
connecting this world with the next, the quick with the dead, that which
is now with that which is to be, and that it would rap out answers to
any questions which might be asked to prove it.

“Some of the wiseacres present laughed lightly at the conjurer’s
immaterial remarks but he assured them on his honor as a gentleman its
guiding spirit was no lesser an (astral) light than that of old King
Solomon himself. Thereupon Mr. Devant invited the audience to ply the
immortal part of the departed wise man with any questions that might be
fit and proper.

“Strangely enough while nobody believed in spirit communications as
exemplified by the rapping table everybody was most anxious to ask some
question which no one on this side of the borderland could answer. The
replies that King Solomon rapped out were deep and philosophical
although not always conforming to our ideas of ethics and morals.
Indeed, his very first reply to a question, which was put by some
guileless suffragette, nearly broke up the show. She asked him, as Bill
Adams would say ‘as man to man,’ how many wives a man should have, and
in that she thought she had trapped him even though he was beyond the
pale of the law. But Solomon showed his superior wisdom as usual and
rebuked the lady by rapping furiously on the table until he had nearly
eight hundred wives to his credit.

“To convince the audience that the table was just a common, single
legged, three footed one of the milliner’s variety the conjurer invited
a committee to step up on the stage and examine it; I went up with
several other men and we nearly had a private séance with old Sol. We
examined the table and found it O. K.; to me it seemed a little top
heavy but I made due allowance for this because King Solomon was a
brainy man.

“Now when the conjurer held it at arm’s length, or I did so as one of
the committee, it kept right on rapping out replies from the gone but
not forgotten spirit of the ancient King. Even when the table was passed
through the audience--”

“You mean _among_ the audience, don’t you, Jack? Even a spirit table
would have hard work passing through the audience.”

“I stand corrected. Even when the table was passed among the audience it
kept up its dark rappings to the great enjoyment of the audience. To me
the rappings had a more or less mechanical sound as if King Solomon’s
knuckles had turned to spirit gold, or common brass would do.

“I figured it out that the raps were done wirelessly, by which I mean
that the top of the table was hollow and contained a small but sensitive
receiver with a single stroke tapper and as the top of the table was
made of a sheet of burnished copper and the three footed base was of
iron with the connecting leg between them of wood it seemed reasonable
to suppose that these formed the aerial and ground.

“Although I listened hard I couldn’t hear the faintest sound of a
spark-gap working but it is an easy matter to put the transmitter in a
sound-proof booth.”

“And thus doth a little science make big skeptics of us all. Now tell
our young readers, Jack, how _S O S_ came to take the place of _C Q D_,
as the ambulance call of the sea.”

“It came about in this way. In 1896 the _International Wireless
Telegraph Convention_ was held in Berlin. Germany’s wireless men, from
her greatest scientists down to her lowly operators hated anything that
had to do with or was used by Marconi, so instead of _C Q D_, they
suggested that the letters _S O S_ be used. Unlike _C Q D_, the letters
_S O S_ have no especial meaning in themselves but they are easy to send
and to read and make, as a matter of fact, a good distress call.

“While _S O S_, was probably sent out many times by various operators
from that time on it did not become famous until the s. s. _Kentucky_
went down off the Diamond Shoals. Her operator did as many an operator
had done before him and has done since, that is, he kept sending the _S
O S_ call. Her engine room was rapidly filling with water but before her
dynamos were submerged and put out of commission the operator on the
_Alamo_ of the _Mallory Line_, ninety miles away, heard the call. The
_Alamo_ reached the sinking ship just in time to save her passengers and
crew before she went down.”

“Do you think it is possible to send a wireless message around the
world?”

“Not without relaying it. You remember back there in 1909 when all the
small fry who were following in Marconi’s footsteps were trying to do
something more wonderful than the great inventor? One of them made the
statement that he had sent out a train of electric waves from his high
power station which traveled completely round the world and in a small
fraction of a second he received the signals on the same aerial; and he
was backed up in it by a college professor, too.”

“I agree with you that college professors may sometimes be wrong, indeed
they are nearly always so,” I assured him.

“Now any kid operator knows,” continued Jack, “that electric waves are
radiated to every point of the compass around an aerial and hence even
if the waves sent out by it had enough power to go around the world they
would meet on the opposite side of the earth and neutralize each other.

“What do you think about signaling from the earth to Mars, Mr. Collins?”

“Not very much. It is never safe to predict, especially to make a
negative prediction, by which I mean to say that a thing can’t be done.
Simon Newcomb, the great astronomer and mathematician, proved by figures
and the known laws of nature, to his own satisfaction and a good many
others, that it was a physical impossibility to build a man-carrying
airplane.

“Langley who was just as big a figure in the world of science believed
that the thing could be done, built model after model that flew but when
he built his big machine to be piloted by a man it fell before it got
fairly into the air. Yet the same year that he failed, the Wright
Brothers, a couple of bicycle mechanics, put a gasoline engine in a
glider and flew. Since then bombing airplanes have been built that will
carry a ton or more.

“The moral is that if you must predict it is better to do so in favor of
rather than against a proposition unless you’re betting on a horse. My
opinion is that signaling to Mars will not be done by long electric
waves set up by electric sparks. Some years ago Tesla, the electrician,
was reported to have received signals from Mars by long electric waves,
that is wireless waves, while Pickering the astronomer got up a plan to
reflect signals to the red planet by short electric, that is light
waves. All he needed to do it with was ten million dollars’ worth of
mirrors and by forming these into a gigantic reflector he opined he
could concentrate the light of the sun into a beam and throw it on the
surface of Mars.

“And this puts me in mind of Tesla’s scheme to transmit power
wirelessly. To transmit power to run machinery and to control power at a
distance by wireless are two entirely different things. Since wireless
waves tend to radiate in all directions parallel with the surface of the
earth from an aerial, it is a very difficult matter to transmit enough
energy wirelessly in any one direction to have a sufficient quantity
left after it has passed through even a short distance to do useful work
such as running a motor.

“As early as 1905 Tesla took out patents for a system of wireless
transmission of power in which he proposed to use the free ether of
space instead of the ether in and around a wire to guide and carry it.
He built a great tower at Wardencliff, Long Island, New York, for the
purpose of radiating power but nothing came of the experiments he made
and after some years the tower was torn down.”

“You don’t believe then that it will ever be possible to transmit energy
for power purposes by wireless?”

“On the contrary, I believe it is possible but other discoveries must be
made before it can be done successfully and this is also true of many
other things which have been and are still looked upon as physical
impossibilities. As to controlling apparatus at a distance by wireless
that is, of course, just as easy as sending a signal, in fact it’s the
same thing.

“Tesla was the first to control the movements of a boat at a distance by
wireless and after him came many others. Even submarines have been so
equipped and controlled but since the surface of the sea reflects most
of the energy of the waves and absorbs the rest of it the boat must have
its aerial above the surface at all times or the waves will not reach
it.

“Attempts to control airships by wireless have been made time without
number but to no useful purpose for no effective distance can be had
between an airship and the sending station. Even sending wireless
messages from airplanes as you said yesterday is only done over a very
short distance and these limits are quickly reached because there is no
way of grounding it.”

“How do you think the distance could be increased?” Jack wanted to know.

“You are asking a hard question, my boy. It might be done by finding a
certain length of wave that would have a carrying capacity through the
ether comparable to that of light, yet be longer than a light wave and
shorter than the wireless waves we use for transmitting over land and
sea. But this is sheer speculation on my part. Well, Jack, we’re all
done and you see it wasn’t such a hard job as you thought. Before we go,
though, I should like to know just what you expect to do in the future.”

“Really, I don’t know, Mr. Collins, though I’ve been thinking pretty
hard about it lately, too. You see, I’ve reached an age where I’ve got
to boil down to business and make some money, but I don’t want any of
that swivel-chair-at-a-desk-on-the-’steenth-floor-of-an-office-building
for mine. I’d get into the airplane game but there’s no more money in it
than there is in wireless.

“My one best thought is to get a little party together, go down to
Brazil and open up a diamond mine,” and he looked fondly at the
glittering stone in his ring.

“What I’d like to do is to get Bill Adams and a few other kindred
spirits to go with me, clean out the Capunicas, and,” his eyes
brightened, “if you’ll join us I’ll make you King of the cannibals
instead of old Oopla.”

“Declined with thanks,” I bowed regally, that is as regally as a man can
bow whose back is already bent. “I haven’t the slightest desire to king
it over any tribe of man-eaters, but if you will let me go with you in
the capacity of adviser, medicine man and book-maker I’ll consider it.”

“Done, signed and sealed,” said Jack and we shook hands till we should
get together on the proposition.

THE END




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK JACK HEATON WIRELESS OPERATOR ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


